Fellow citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives: The view which I have now to present to you of our affairs foreign and domestic realizes the most sanguine anticipations which have been entertained of the public prosperity. If we look to the whole our growth as a nation continues to be rapid beyond example; if to the states which compose it the same gratifying spectacle is exhibited. Our expansion over the vast territory within our limits has been great without indicating any decline in those sections from which the emigration has been most conspicuous. We have daily gained strength by a native population in every quarter—a population devoted to our happy system of government and cherishing the bond of union with internal affection. Experience has already shewn that the difference of climate and of industry proceeding from that cause inseparable from such vast domains and which under other systems might have a repulsive tendency can not fail to produce with us under wise regulations the opposite effect. What one portion wants the other may supply; and this will be most sensibly felt by the parts most distant from each other forming thereby a domestic market and an active intercourse between the extremes and throughout every portion of our Union. Thus by a happy distribution of power between the national and state governments governments which rest exclusively on the sovereignty of the people and are fully adequate to the great purposes for which they were respectively instituted causes which might otherwise lead to dismemberment operate powerfully to draw us closer together. In every other circumstance a correct view of the actual state of our union must be equally gratifying to our constituents. Our relations with foreign powers are of a friendly character although certain interesting differences remain unsettled with some. Our revenue under the mild system of impost and tonnage continues to be adequate to all the purposes of the government. Our agriculture commerce manufactures and navigation flourish. Our fortifications are advancing in the degree authorized by existing appropriations to maturity and due progress is made in the augmentation of the Navy to the limit prescribed for it by law. For these blessings we owe to Almighty God from whom we derive them and with profound reverence our most grateful and unceasing acknowledgments. In adverting to our relations with foreign powers which are always an object of the highest importance I have to remark that of the subjects which have been brought into discussion with them during the present administration some have been satisfactorily terminated others have been suspended to be resumed hereafter under circumstances more favorable to success and others are still in negotiation with the hope that they may be adjusted with mutual accommodation to the interests and to the satisfaction of the respective parties. It has been the invariable object of this government to cherish the most friendly relations with every power and on principles and conditions which might make them permanent. A systematic effort has been made to place our commerce with each power on a footing of perfect reciprocity to settle with each in a spirit of candor and liberality all existing differences and to anticipate and remove so far as it might be practicable all causes of future variance. It having been stipulated by the seventh article of the convention of navigation and commerce which was concluded on [1822-06-24] between the United States and France that the said convention should continue in force for two years from the first of October of that year and for an indefinite term afterwards unless one of the parties should declare its intention to renounce it in which event it should cease to operate at the end of six months from such declaration and no such intention having been announced the convention having been found advantageous to both parties it has since remained and still remains in force. At the time when that convention was concluded many interesting subjects were left unsettled and particularly our claim to indemnity for spoliations which were committed on our commerce in the late wars. For these interests and claims it was in the contemplation of the parties to make provision at a subsequent day by a more comprehensive and definitive treaty. The object has been duly attended to since by the executive but as yet it has not been accomplished. It is hoped that a favorable opportunity will present itself for opening a negotiation which may embrace and arrange all existing differences and every other concern in which they have a common interest upon the accession of the present King of France an event which has occurred since the close of the last session of Congress. With Great Britain our commercial intercourse rests on the same footing that it did at the last session. by the convention of 1815 the commerce between the United States and the British dominions in Europe and the East Indies was arranged on a principle of reciprocity. That convention was confirmed and continued in force with slight exceptions by a subsequent treaty for the term of 10 years from [1818-10-20] the date of the latter. The trade with the British colonies in the West Indies has not as yet been arranged by treaty or otherwise to our satisfaction. An approach to that result has been made by legislative acts whereby many serious impediments which had been raised by the parties in defense of their respective claims were removed. An earnest desire exists and has been manifested on the part of this government to place the commerce with the colonies likewise on a footing of reciprocal advantage and it is hoped that the British government seeing the justice of the proposal and its importance to the colonies will ere long accede to it. The commissioners who were appointed for the adjustment of the boundary between the territories of the United States and those of Great Britain specified in the fifth article of the Treaty of Ghent having disagreed in their decision and both governments having agreed to establish that boundary by amicable negotiation between them it is hoped that it may be satisfactorily adjusted in that mode. The boundary specified by the sixth article has been established by the decision of the commissioners. From the progress made in that provided for by the seventh according to a report recently received there is good cause to presume that it will be settled in the course of the ensuing year. It is a cause of serious regret that no arrangement has yet been finally concluded between the two governments to secure by joint cooperation the suppression of the slave trade. It was the object of the British government in the early stages of the negotiation to adopt a plan for the suppression which should include the concession of the mutual right of search by the ships of war of each party of the vessels of the other for suspected offenders. This was objected to by this government on the principle that as the right of search was a right of war of a belligerent toward a neutral power it might have an ill effect to extend it by treaty to an offense which had been made comparatively mild to a time of peace. Anxious however for the suppression of this trade it was thought advisable in compliance with a resolution of the House of Representatives founded on an act of Congress to propose to the British government an expedient which should be free from that objection and more effectual for the object by making it piratical. In that mode the enormity of the crime would place the offenders out of the protection of their government and involve no question of search or other question between the parties touching their respective rights. It was believed also that it would completely suppress the trade in the vessels of both parties and by their respective citizens and subjects in those of other powers with whom it was hoped that the odium which would thereby be attached to it would produce a corresponding arrangement and by means thereof its entire extirpation forever. A convention to this effect was concluded and signed in London on [1824-03-13] by plenipotentiaries duly authorized by both governments to the ratification of which certain obstacles have arisen which are not yet entirely removed. The difference between the parties still remaining has been reduced to a point not of sufficient magnitude as is presumed to be permitted to defeat an object so near to the heart of both nations and so desirable to the friends of humanity throughout the world. As objections however to the principle recommended by the House of Representatives or at least to the consequences inseparable from it and which are understood to apply to the law have been raised which may deserve a reconsideration of the whole subject I have thought it proper to suspend the conclusion of a new convention until the definitive sentiments of Congress may be ascertained. The documents relating to the negotiation are with that intent submitted to your consideration. Our commerce with Sweden has been placed on a footing of perfect reciprocity by treaty and with Russia the Netherlands Prussia the free Hanseatic cities the Dukedom of Oldenburg and Sardinia by internal regulations on each side founded on mutual agreement between the respective governments. The principles upon which the commercial policy of the United States is founded are to be traced to an early period. They are essentially connected with those upon which their independence was declared and owe their origin to the enlightened men who took the lead in our affairs at that important epoch. They are developed in their first treaty of commerce with France of [1778-02-06] and by a formal commission which was instituted immediately after the conclusion of their Revolutionary struggle for the purpose of negotiating treaties of commerce with every European power. The first treaty of the United States with Prussia which was negotiated by that commission affords a signal illustration of those principles. The act of Congress of [1815-03-03] adopted immediately after the return of a general peace was a new overture to foreign nations to establish our commercial relations with them on the basis of free and equal reciprocity. That principle has pervaded all the acts of Congress and all the negotiations of the executive on the subject. A convention for the settlement of important questions in relation to the North West coast of this continent and its adjoining seas was concluded and signed at St. Petersburg on the 5th day of April last by the minister plenipotentiary of the United States and plenipotentiaries of the Imperial government of Russia. It will immediately be laid before the Senate for the exercise of the constitutional authority of that body with reference to its ratification. It is proper to add that the manner in which this negotiation was invited and conducted on the part of the Emperor has been very satisfactory. The great and extraordinary changes which have happened in the governments of Spain and Portugal within the last two years without seriously affecting the friendly relations which under all of them have been maintained with those powers by the United States have been obstacles to the adjustment of the particular subjects of discussion which have arisen with each. A resolution of the Senate adopted at their last session called for information as to the effect produced upon our relations with Spain by the recognition on the part of the United States of the independent South American governments. The papers containing that information are now communicated to Congress. A charge' d'affaires has been received from the independent government of Brazil. That country heretofore a colonial possession of Portugal had some years since been proclaimed by the Sovereign of Portugal himself an independent Kingdom. Since his return to Lisbon a revolution in Brazil has established a new government there with an imperial title at the head of which is placed a prince in whom the regency had been vested by the King at the time of his departure. There is reason to expect that by amicable negotiation the independence of Brazil will ere long be recognized by Portugal herself. With the remaining powers of Europe with those on the coast of Barbary and with all the new South American states our relations are of a friendly character. We have ministers plenipotentiary residing with the Republics of Colombia and Chile and have received ministers of the same rank from Columbia Guatemala Buenos Aires and Mexico. Our commercial relations with all those states are mutually beneficial and increasing. With the Republic of Colombia a treaty of commerce has been formed of which a copy is received and the original daily expected. A negotiation for a like treaty would have been commenced with Buenos Aires had it not been prevented by the indisposition and lamented decease of Mr. Rodney our minister there and to whose memory the most respectful attention has been shewn by the government of that Republic. An advantageous alteration in our treaty with Tunis has been obtained by our consular agent residing there the official document of which when received will be laid before the Senate. The attention of the government has been drawn with great solicitude to other subjects and particularly to that relating to a state of maritime war involving the relative rights of neutral and belligerent in such wars. Most of the difficulties which we have experienced and of the losses which we have sustained since the establishment of our independence have proceeded from the unsettled state of those rights and the extent to which the belligerent claim has been carried against the neutral party. It is impossible to look back on the occurrences of the late wars in Europe and to behold the disregard which was paid to our rights as a neutral power and the waste which was made of our commerce by the parties to those wars by various acts of their respective governments and under the pretext by each that the other had set the example without great mortification and a fixed purpose never to submit to the like in future. An attempt to remove those causes of possible variance by friendly negotiation and on just principles which should be applicable to all parties could it was presumed be viewed by none other than as a proof of an earnest desire to preserve those relations with every power. In the late war between France and Spain a crisis occurred in which it seemed probable that all controvertible principles involved in such wars might be brought into discussion and settled to the satisfaction of all parties. Propositions having this object in view have been made to the governments of Great Britain France Russia and of other powers which have been received in a friendly manner by all but as yet no treaty has been formed with either for its accomplishment. The policy will it is presumed be persevered in and in the hope that it may be successful. It will always be recollected that with one of the parties to those wars and from whom we received those injuries we sought redress by war. From the other by whose then reigning government our vessels were seized in port as well as at sea and their cargoes confiscated indemnity has been expected but has not yet been rendered. It was under the influence of the latter that our vessels were likewise seized by the governments of Spain Holland Denmark Sweden and Naples and from whom indemnity has been claimed and is still expected with the exception of Spain by whom it has been rendered. With both parties we had abundant cause of war but we had no alternative but to resist that which was most powerful at sea and pressed us nearest at home. With this all differences were settled by a treaty founded on conditions fair and honorable to both and which has been so far executed with perfect good faith. It has been earnestly hoped that the other would of its own accord and from a sentiment of justice and conciliation make to our citizens the indemnity to which they are entitled and thereby remove from our relations any just cause of discontent on our side. It is estimated that the receipts into the Treasury during the current year exclusive of loans will exceed $18.5 million which with the sum remaining in the Treasury at the end of the last year amounting to $9463922.81 will after discharging the current disbursements of the year the interest on the public debt and upward of $11633011.52 of the principal leave a balance of more than $3 million in the Treasury on the first day of January next. A larger amount of the debt contracted during the late war bearing an interest of 6 percent becoming redeemable in the course of the ensuing year than could be discharged by the ordinary revenue the act of the 26th of May authorized a loan of $5 million at 4.5 percent to meet the same. By this arrangement an annual saving will accrue to the public of $75000. Under the act of the 24th of May last a loan of $5 million was authorized in order to meet the awards under the Florida treaty which was negotiated at par with the Bank of the United States at 4.5 percent the limit of interest fixed by the act. By this provision the claims of our citizens who had sustained so great a loss by spoliations and from whom indemnity had been so long withheld were promptly paid. For these advances the public will be amply repaid at no distant day by the sale of the lands in Florida. Of the great advantages resulting from the acquisition of the territory in other respects too high an estimate can not be formed. It is estimated that the receipts into the Treasury during the year 1825 will be sufficient to meet the disbursements of the year including the sum of $10 million which is annually appropriated by the act of constituting the sinking fund to the payment of the principal and interest of the public debt. The whole amount of the public debt on the first of January next may be estimated at $86 million inclusive of $2.5 million of the loan authorized by the act of the 26th of May last. In this estimate is included a stock of $7 million issued for the purchase of that amount of the capital stock of the Bank of the United States and which as the stock of the bank still held by the government will at least be fully equal to its reimbursement ought not to be considered as constituting a part of the public debt. Estimating then the whole amount of the public debt at $79 million and regarding the annual receipts and expenditures of the government a well-founded hope may be entertained that should no unexpected event occur the whole of the public debt may be discharged in the course of 10 years and the government be left at liberty thereafter to apply such portion of the revenue as may not be necessary for current expenses to such other objects as may be most conducive to the public security and welfare. That the sums applicable to these objects will be very considerable may be fairly concluded when it is recollected that a large amount of the public revenue has been applied since the late war to the construction of the public buildings in this city; to the erection of fortifications along the coast and of arsenals in different parts of the Union; to the augmentation of the Navy; to the extinguishment of the Indian title to large tracts of fertile territory; to the acquisition of Florida; to pensions to Revolutionary officers and soldiers and to invalids of the late war. On many of these objects the expense will annually be diminished and cease at no distant period on most of them. On the [1917-01-01] the public debt amounted to $123491965.16 and notwithstanding the large sums which have been applied to these objects it has been reduced since that period $37446961.78. The last portion of the public debt will be redeemable on [1835-01-01] and while there is the best reason to believe that the resources of the government will be continually adequate to such portions of it as may become due in the interval it is recommended to Congress to seize every opportunity which may present itself to reduce the rate of interest on every part thereof. The high state of the public credit and the great abundance of money are at this time very favorable to such a result. It must be very gratifying to our fellow citizens to witness this flourishing state of the public finances when it is recollected that no burthen whatever has been imposed upon them. The military establishment in all its branches in the performance of the various duties assigned to each justifies the favorable view which was presented of the efficiency of its organization at the last session. All the appropriations have been regularly applied to the objects intended by Congress and so far as the disbursements have been made the accounts have been rendered and settled without loss to the public. The condition of the Army itself as relates to the officers and men in science and discipline is highly respectable. The military academy on which the Army essentially rests and to which it is much indebted for this state of improvement has attained in comparison with any other institution of a like kind a high degree of perfection. Experience however has shewn that the dispersed condition of the corps of artillery is unfavorable to the discipline of that important branch of the military establishment. To remedy this inconvenience eleven companies have been assembled at the fortification erected at Old Point Comfort as a school for artillery instruction with intention as they shall be perfected in the various duties of that service to order them to other posts and to supply their places with other companies for instruction in like manner. In this mode a complete knowledge of the science and duties of this arm will be extended throughout the whole corps of artillery. But to carry this object fully into effect will require the aid of Congress to obtain which the subject is now submitted to your consideration. Of the progress which has been made in the construction of fortifications for the permanent defense of our maritime frontier according to the plan decided on and to the extent of the existing appropriations the report of the Secretary of War which is herewith communicated will give a detailed account. Their final completion can not fail to give great additional security to that frontier and to diminish proportionably the expense of defending it in the event of war. The provisions in several acts of Congress of the last session for the improvement of the navigation of the Mississippi and the Ohio of the harbor of Presqu'isle on Lake Erie and the repair of the Plymouth beach are in a course of regular execution; and there is reason to believe that the appropriation in each instance will be adequate to the object. To carry these improvements fully into effect the superintendence of them has been assigned to officers of the Corps of Engineers. Under the act of 30th April last authorizing the President to cause a survey to be made with the necessary plans and estimates of such roads and canals as he might deem of national importance in a commercial or military point of view or for the transportation of the mail a board has been instituted consisting of two distinguished officers of the Corps of Engineers and a distinguished civil engineer with assistants who have been actively employed in carrying into effect the object of the act. They have carefully examined the route between the Potomac and the Ohio rivers; between the latter and Lake Erie; between the Alleghany and the Susquehannah; and the routes between the Delaware and the Raritan Barnstable and Buzzards Bay and between Boston Harbor and Narraganset Bay. Such portion of the Corps of Topographical Engineers as could be spared from the survey of the coast has been employed in surveying the very important route between the Potomac and the Ohio. Considerable progress has been made in it but the survey can not be completed until the next season. It is gratifying to add from the view already taken that there is good cause to believe that this great national object may be fully accomplished. It is contemplated to commence early in the next season the execution of the other branch of the act—that which relates to roads—and with the survey of a route from this city through the Southern states to New Orleans the importance of which can not be too highly estimated. All the officers of both the corps of engineers who could be spared from other services have been employed in exploring and surveying the routes for canals. to digest a plan for both objects for the great purposes specified will require a thorough knowledge of every part of our Union and of the relation of each part to the others and of all to the seat of the general government. For such a digest it will be necessary that the information be full minute and precise. With a view to these important objects I submit to the consideration of the Congress the propriety of enlarging both the corps of engineers—the military and topographical. It need scarcely be remarked that the more extensively these corps are engaged in the improvement of their country in the execution of the powers of Congress and in aid of the states in such improvements as lie beyond that limit when such aid is desired the happier the effect will be in many views of which the subject is perceptible. By profiting of their science the works will always be well executed and by giving to the officers such employment our Union will derive all the advantage in peace as well as in war from their talents and services which they can afford. In this mode also the military will be incorporated with the civil and unfounded and injurious distinctions and prejudices of every kind be done away. To the corps themselves this service can not fail to be equally useful since by the knowledge they would thus acquire they would be eminently better qualified in the event of war for the great purposes for which they were instituted. Our relations with the Indian tribes within our limits have not been materially changed during the year. The hostile disposition evinced by certain tribes on the Missouri during the last year still continues and has extended in some degree to those on the Upper Mississippi and the Upper Lakes. Several parties of our citizens have been plundered and murdered by those tribes. In order to establish relations of friendship with them Congress at the last session made an appropriation for treaties with them and for the employment of a suitable military escort to accompany and attend the commissioners at the places appointed for the negotiations. This object has not been effected. The season was too far advanced when the appropriation was made and the distance too great to permit it but measures have been taken and all the preparations will be completed to accomplish it at an early period in the next season. Believing that the hostility of the tribes particularly on the Upper Mississippi and the Lakes is in no small degree owing to the wars which are carried on between the tribes residing in that quarter measures have been taken to bring about a general peace among them which if successful will not only tend to the security of our citizens but be of great advantage to the Indians themselves. With the exception of the tribes referred to our relations with all the others are on the same friendly footing and it affords me great satisfaction to add that they are making steady advances in civilization and the improvement of their condition. Many of the tribes have already made great progress in the arts of civilized life. This desirable result has been brought about by the humane and persevering policy of the government and particularly by means of the appropriation for the civilization of the Indians. There have been established under the provisions of this act 32 schools containing 916 scholars who are well instructed in several branches of literature and likewise in agriculture and the ordinary arts of life. Under the appropriation to authorize treaties with the Creeks and Quaupaw Indians commissioners have been appointed and negotiations are now pending but the result is not yet known. For more full information respecting the principle which has been adopted for carrying into effect the act of Congress authorizing surveys with plans and estimates for canals and roads and on every other branch of duty incident to the Department of War I refer you to the report of the Secretary. The squadron in the Mediterranean has been maintained in the extent which was proposed in the report of the Secretary of the Navy of the last year and has afforded to our commerce the necessary protection in that sea. Apprehending however that the unfriendly relations which have existed between Algiers and some of the powers of Europe might be extended to us it has been thought expedient to augment the force there and in consequence the North Carolina a ship of the line has been prepared and will sail in a few days to join it. The force employed in the Gulf of Mexico and in the neighboring seas for the suppression of piracy has likewise been preserved essentially in the state in which it was during the last year. A persevering effort has been made for the accomplishment of that object and much protection has thereby been afforded to our commerce but still the practice is far from being suppressed. From every view which has been taken of the subject it is thought that it will be necessary rather to augment than to diminish our force in that quarter. There is reason to believe that the piracies now complained of are committed by bands of robbers who inhabit the land and who by preserving good intelligence with the towns and seizing favorable opportunities rush forth and fall on unprotected merchant vessels of which they make an easy prey. The pillage thus taken they carry to their lurking places and dispose of afterwards at prices tending to seduce the neighboring population. This combination is understood to be of great extent and is the more to be deprecated because the crime of piracy is often attended with the murder of the crews these robbers knowing if any survived their lurking places would be exposed and they be caught and punished. That this atrocious practice should be carried to such extent is cause of equal surprise and regret. It is presumed that it must be attributed to the relaxed and feeble state of the local governments since it is not doubted from the high character of the governor of Cuba who is well known and much respected here that if he had the power he would promptly suppress it. Whether those robbers should be pursued on the land the local authorities be made responsible for these atrocities or any other measure be resorted to to suppress them is submitted to the consideration of Congress. In execution of the laws for the suppression of the slave trade a vessel has been occasionally sent from that squadron to the coast of Africa with orders to return thence by the usual track of the slave ships and to seize any of our vessels which might be engaged in that trade. None have been found and it is believed that none are thus employed. It is well known however that the trade still exists under other flags. The health of our squadron while at Thompsons Island has been much better during the present than it was the last season. Some improvements have been made and others are contemplated there which it is believed will have a very salutary effect. On the Pacific our commerce has much increased and on that coast as well as on that sea the United States have many important interests which require attention and protection. It is thought that all the considerations which suggested the expediency of placing a squadron on that sea operate with augmented force for maintaining it there at least in equal extent. For detailed information respecting the state of our maritime force on each sea the improvement necessary to be made on either in the organization of the naval establishment generally and of the laws for its better government I refer you to the report of the Secretary of the Navy which is herewith communicated. The revenue of the Post Office Department has received a considerable augmentation in the present year. The current receipts will exceed the expenditures although the transportation of the mail within the year has been much increased. A report of the Postmaster General which is transmitted will furnish in detail the necessary information respecting the administr
