Fellow citizens of the Senate and of the House of Representatives: In taking a general survey of the concerns of our beloved country with reference to subjects interesting to the common welfare the first sentiment which impresses itself upon the mind is of gratitude to the Omnipotent Disposer of All Good for the continuance of the signal blessings of His providence and especially for that health which to an unusual extent has prevailed within our borders and for that abundance which in the vicissitudes of the seasons has been scattered with profusion over our land. Nor ought we less to ascribe to Him the glory that we are permitted to enjoy the bounties of His hand in peace and tranquillity—in peace with all the other nations of the earth in tranquillity among our selves. There has indeed rarely been a period in the history of civilized man in which the general condition of the Christian nations has been marked so extensively by peace and prosperity. Europe with a few partial and unhappy exceptions has enjoyed 10 years of peace during which all her governments what ever the theory of their constitutions may have been are successively taught to feel that the end of their institution is the happiness of the people and that the exercise of power among men can be justified only by the blessings it confers upon those over whom it is extended. During the same period our intercourse with all those nations has been pacific and friendly; it so continues. Since the close of your last session no material variation has occurred in our relations with any one of them. In the commercial and navigation system of Great Britain important changes of municipal regulation have recently been sanctioned by acts of Parliament the effect of which upon the interests of other nations and particularly upon ours has not yet been fully developed. In the recent renewal of the diplomatic missions on both sides between the two governments assurances have been given and received of the continuance and increase of the mutual confidence and cordiality by which the adjustment of many points of difference had already been effected and which affords the surest pledge for the ultimate satisfactory adjustment of those which still remain open or may hereafter arise. The policy of the United States in their commercial intercourse with other nations has always been of the most liberal character. In the mutual exchange of their respective productions they have abstained altogether from prohibitions; they have interdicted themselves the power of laying taxes upon exports and when ever they have favored their own shipping by special preferences or exclusive privileges in their own ports it has been only with a view to countervail similar favors and exclusions granted by the nations with whom we have been engaged in traffic to their own people or shipping and to the disadvantage of ours. Immediately after the close of the last war a proposal was fairly made by the act of Congress of 1815-03-03 to all the maritime nations to lay aside the system of retaliating restrictions and exclusions and to place the shipping of both parties to the common trade on a footing of equality in respect to the duties of tonnage and impost. This offer was partially and successively accepted by Great Britain Sweden the Netherlands the Hanseatic cities Prussia Sardinia the Duke of Oldenburg and Russia. It was also adopted under certain modifications in our late commercial convention with France and by the act of Congress of 1824-01-08 it has received a new confirmation with all the nations who had acceded to it and has been offered again to all those who are or may here after be willing to abide in reciprocity by it. But all these regulations whether established by treaty or by municipal enactments are still subject to one important restriction. The removal of discriminating duties of tonnage and of impost is limited to articles of the growth produce or manufacture of the country to which the vessel belongs or to such articles as are most usually first shipped from her ports. It will deserve the serious consideration of Congress whether even this remnant of restriction may not be safely abandoned and whether the general tender of equal competition made in the act of 1824-01-08 may not be extended to include all articles of merchandise not prohibited of what country so ever they may be the produce or manufacture. Propositions of this effect have already been made to us by more than one European government and it is probable that if once established by legislation or compact with any distinguished maritime state it would recommend itself by the experience of its advantages to the general accession of all. The convention of commerce and navigation between the United States and France concluded on 1822-06-24 was in the understanding and intent of both parties as appears upon its face only a temporary arrangement of the points of difference between them of the most immediate and pressing urgency. It was limited in the first instance to two years from 1822-10-01 but with a proviso that it should further continue in force 'til the conclusion of a general and definitive treaty of commerce unless terminated by a notice six months in advance of either of the parties to the other. Its operation so far as it extended has been mutually advantageous and it still continues in force by common consent. But it left unadjusted several objects of great interest to the citizens and subjects of both countries and particularly a mass of claims to considerable amount of citizens of the United States upon the government of France of indemnity for property taken or destroyed under circumstances of the most aggravated and outrageous character. In the long period during which continual and earnest appeals have been made to the equity and magnanimity of France in behalf of these claims their justice has not been as it could not be denied. It was hoped that the accession of a new Sovereign to the throne would have afforded a favorable opportunity for presenting them to the consideration of his government. They have been presented and urged hither to without effect. The repeated and earnest representations of our minister at the Court of France remain as yet even without an answer. Were the demands of nations upon the justice of each other susceptible of adjudication by the sentence of an impartial tribunal those to which I now refer would long since have been settled and adequate indemnity would have been obtained. There are large amounts of similar claims upon the Netherlands Naples and Denmark. For those upon Spain prior to 1819 indemnity was after many years of patient forbearance obtained; and those upon Sweden have been lately compromised by a private settlement in which the claimants themselves have acquiesced. The governments of Denmark and of Naples have been recently reminded of those yet existing against them nor will any of them be forgotten while a hope may be indulged of obtaining justice by the means within the constitutional power of the executive and without resorting to those means of self-redress which as well as the time circumstances and occasion which may require them are within the exclusive competency of the legislature. It is with great satisfaction that I am enabled to bear witness to the liberal spirit with which the Republic of Colombia has made satisfaction for well-established claims of a similar character and among the documents now communicated to Congress will be distinguished a treaty of commerce and navigation with that Republic the ratifications of which have been exchanged since the last recess of the legislature. The negotiation of similar treaties with all of the independent South American states has been contemplated and may yet be accomplished. The basis of them all as proposed by the United States has been laid in two principles—the one of entire and unqualified reciprocity the other the mutual obligation of the parties to place each other permanently upon the footing of the most favored nation. These principles are indeed indispensable to the effectual emancipation of the American hemisphere from the thralldom of colonizing monopolies and exclusions an event rapidly realizing in the progress of human affairs and which the resistance still opposed in certain parts of Europe to the acknowledgment of the Southern American republics as independent states will it is believed contribute more effectually to accomplish. The time has been and that not remote when some of those states might in their anxious desire to obtain a nominal recognition have accepted of a nominal independence clogged with burdensome conditions and exclusive commercial privileges granted to the nation from which they have separated to the disadvantage of all others. They are all now aware that such concessions to any European nation would be incompatible with that independence which they have declared and maintained Among the measures which have been suggested to them by the new relations with one another resulting from the recent changes in their condition is that of assembling at the Isthmus of Panama a congress at which each of them should be represented to deliberate upon objects important to the welfare of all. The republics of Colombia of Mexico and of Central America have already deputed plenipotentiaries to such a meeting and they have invited the United States to be also represented there by their ministers. The invitation has been accepted and ministers on the part of the United States will be commissioned to attend at those deliberations and to take part in them so far as may be compatible with that neutrality from which it is neither our intention nor the desire of the other American states that we should depart. The commissioners under the seventh article of the Treaty of Ghent have so nearly completed their arduous labors that by the report recently received from the agent on the part of the United States there is reason to expect that the commission will be closed at their next session appointed for May 22 of the ensuing year. The other commission appointed to ascertain the indemnities due for slaves carried away from the United States after the close of the late war have met with some difficulty which has delayed their progress in the inquiry. A reference has been made to the British government on the subject which it may be hoped will tend to hasten the decision of the commissioners or serve as a substitute for it. Among the powers specifically granted to Congress by the Constitution are those of establishing uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States and of providing for organizing arming and disciplining the militia and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the services of the United States. The magnitude and complexity of the interests affected by legislation upon these subjects may account for the fact that long and often as both of them have occupied the attention and animated the debates of Congress no systems have yet been devised for fulfilling to the satisfaction of the community the duties prescribed by these grants of power. To conciliate the claim of the individual citizen to the enjoyment of personal liberty with the effective obligation of private contracts is the difficult problem to be solved by a law of bankruptcy. These are objects of the deepest interest to society affecting all that is precious in the existence of multitudes of persons many of them in the classes essentially dependent and helpless of the age requiring nurture and of the sex entitled to protection from the free agency of the parent and the husband. The organization of the militia is yet more indispensable to the liberties of the country. It is only by an effective militia that we can at once enjoy the repose of peace and bid defiance to foreign aggression; it is by the militia that we are constituted an armed nation standing in perpetual panoply of defense in the presence of all the other nations of the earth. To this end it would be necessary if possible so to shape its organization as to give it a more united and active energy. There are laws establishing an uniform militia throughout the United States and for arming and equipping its whole body. But it is a body of dislocated members without the vigor of unity and having little of uniformity but the name. To infuse into this most important institution the power of which it is susceptible and to make it available for the defense of the Union at the shortest notice and at the smallest expense possible of time of life and of treasure are among the benefits to be expected from the persevering deliberations of Congress. Among the unequivocal indications of our national prosperity is the flourishing state of our finances. The revenues of the present year from all their principal sources will exceed the anticipations of the last. The balance in the Treasury on the first of January last was a little short of $2000000 exclusive of $2500000 being the moiety of the loan of $5000000 authorized by the act of 1824-05-26. The receipts into the Treasury from the 1st of January to the 30th of September exclusive of the other moiety of the same loan are estimated at $16500000 and it is expected that those of the current quarter will exceed $5000000 forming an aggregate of receipts of nearly $22000000 independent of the loan. The expenditures of the year will not exceed that sum more than $2000000. By those expenditures nearly $8000000 of the principal of the public debt that have been discharged. More than $1500000 has been devoted to the debt of gratitude to the warriors of the Revolution; a nearly equal sum to the construction of fortifications and the acquisition of ordnance and other permanent preparations of national defense; $500000 to the gradual increase of the Navy; an equal sum for purchases of territory from the Indians and payment of annuities to them; and upward of $1000000 for objects of internal improvement authorized by special acts of the last Congress. If we add to these $4000000 for payment of interest upon the public debt there remains a sum of $7000000 which have defrayed the whole expense of the administration of government in its legislative executive and judiciary departments including the support of the military and naval establishments and all the occasional contingencies of a government coextensive with the Union. The amount of duties secured on merchandise imported since the commencement of the year is about $25500000 and that which will accrue during the current quarter is estimated at $5500000; from these $31000000 deducting the drawbacks estimated at less than $7000000 a sum exceeding $24000000 will constitute the revenue of the year and will exceed the whole expenditures of the year. The entire amount of the public debt remaining due on the first of January next will be short of $81000000. By an act of Congress of the 3rd of March last a loan of $12000000 was authorized at 4.5 percent or an exchange of stock to that amount of 4.5 percent for a stock of 6 percent to create a fund for extinguishing an equal amount of the public debt bearing an interest of 6 percent redeemable in 1826. An account of the measures taken to give effect to this act will be laid before you by the Secretary of the Treasury. As the object which it had in view has been but partially accomplished it will be for the consideration of Congress whether the power with which it clothed the executive should not be renewed at an early day of the present session and under what modifications. The act of Congress of the 3rd of March last directing the Secretary of the Treasury to subscribe in the name and for the use of the United States for 1500 shares of the capital stock of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal Company has been executed by the actual subscription for the amount specified; and such other measures have been adopted by that officer under the act as the fulfillment of its intentions requires. The latest accounts received of this important undertaking authorize the belief that it is in successful progress. The payments into the Treasury from the proceeds of the sales of the public lands during the present year were estimated at $1000000. The actual receipts of the first two quarters have fallen very little short of that sum; it is not expected that the second half of the year will be equally productive but the income of the year from that source may now be safely estimated at $1500000. The act of Congress of 1824-05-18 to provide for the extinguishment of the debt due to the United States by the purchasers of public lands was limited in its operation of relief to the purchaser to the 10th of April last. Its effect at the end of the quarter during which it expired was to reduce that debt from $10000000 to $7000000 By the operation of similar prior laws of relief from and since that of 1821-03-02 the debt had been reduced from upward of $22000000 to $10000000. It is exceedingly desirable that it should be extinguished altogether; and to facilitate that consummation I recommend to Congress the revival for one year more of the act of 1824-05-18 with such provisional modification as may be necessary to guard the public interests against fraudulent practices in the resale of the relinquished land. The purchasers of public lands are among the most useful of our fellow citizens and since the system of sales for cash alone has been introduced great indulgence has been justly extended to those who had previously purchased upon credit. The debt which had been contracted under the credit sales had become unwieldy and its extinction was alike advantageous to the purchaser and to the public. Under the system of sales matured as it has been by experience and adapted to the exigencies of the times the lands will continue as they have become an abundant source of revenue; and when the pledge of them to the public creditor shall have been redeemed by the entire discharge of the national debt the swelling tide of wealth with which they replenish the common Treasury may be made to reflow in unfailing streams of improvement from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. The condition of the various branches of the public service resorting from the Department of War and their administration during the current year will be exhibited in the report of the Secretary of War and the accompanying documents herewith communicated. The organization and discipline of the Army are effective and satisfactory. To counteract the prevalence of desertion among the troops it has been suggested to withhold from the men a small portion of their monthly pay until the period of their discharge; and some expedient appears to be necessary to preserve and maintain among the officers so much of the art of horsemanship as could scarcely fail to be found wanting on the possible sudden eruption of a war which should take us unprovided with a single corps of cavalry. The Military Academy at West Point under the restrictions of a severe but paternal superintendence recommends itself more and more to the patronage of the nation and the numbers of meritorious officers which it forms and introduces to the public service furnishes the means of multiplying the undertakings of the public improvements to which their acquirements at that institution are peculiarly adapted. The school of artillery practice established at Fortress Monroe Hampton Virginia is well suited to the same purpose and may need the aid of further legislative provision to the same end. The reports of the various officers at the head of the administrative branches of the military service connected with the quartering clothing subsistence health and pay of the Army exhibit the assiduous vigilance of those officers in the performance of their respective duties and the faithful accountability which has pervaded every part of the system. Our relations with the numerous tribes of aboriginal natives of this country scattered over its extensive surface and so dependent even for their existence upon our power have been during the present year highly interesting. An act of Congress of 1824-05-25 made an appropriation to defray the expenses of making treaties of trade and friendship with the Indian tribes beyond the Mississippi. An act of 1825-03-03 authorized treaties to be made with the Indians for their consent to the making of a road from the frontier of Missouri to that of New Mexico and another act of the same date provided for defraying the expenses of holding treaties with the Sioux Chippeways Menomenees Sauks Foxes etc. for the purpose of establishing boundaries and promoting peace between said tribes. The first and last objects of these acts have been accomplished and the second is yet in a process of execution. The treaties which since the last session of Congress have been concluded with the several tribes will be laid before the Senate for their consideration conformably to the Constitution. They comprise large and valuable acquisitions of territory and they secure an adjustment of boundaries and give pledges of permanent peace between several tribes which had been long waging bloody wars against each other. On the 12th of February last a treaty was signed at the Indian Springs between commissioners appointed on the part of the United States and certain chiefs and individuals of the Creek Nation of Indians which was received at the seat of government only a very few days before the close of the last session of Congress and of the late administration. The advice and consent of the Senate was given to it on the 3rd of March too late for it to receive the ratification of the then President of the United States; it was ratified on the 7th of March under the unsuspecting impression that it had been negotiated in good faith and in the confidence inspired by the recommendation of the Senate. The subsequent transactions in relation to this treaty will form the subject of a separate communication. The appropriations made by Congress for public works as well in the construction of fortifications as for purposes of internal improvement so far as they have been expended have been faithfuly applied. Their progress has been delayed by the want of suitable officers for superintending them. An increase of both the corps of engineers military and topographical was recommended by my predecessor at the last session of Congress. The reasons upon which that recommendation was founded subsist in all their force and have acquired additional urgency since that time. The Military Academy at West Point will furnish from the cadets there officers well qualified for carrying this measure into effect. The Board of Engineers for Internal Improvement appointed for carrying into execution the act of Congress of 1824-04-30 "to procure the necessary surveys plans and estimates on the subject of roads and canals" have been actively engaged in that service from the close of the last session of Congress. They have completed the surveys necessary for ascertaining the practicability of a canal from the Chesapeake Bay to the Ohio River and are preparing a full report on that subject which when completed will be laid before you. The same observation is to be made with regard to the two other objects of national importance upon which the Board have been occupied namely the accomplishment of a national road from this city to New Orleans and the practicability of uniting the waters of Lake Memphramagog with Connecticut River and the improvement of the navigation of that river. The surveys have been made and are nearly completed. The report may be expected at an early period during the present session of Congress. The acts of Congress of the last session relative to the surveying marking or laying out roads in the Territories of Florida Arkansas and Michigan from Missouri to Mexico and for the continuation of the Cumberland road are some of them fully executed and others in the process of execution. Those for completing or commencing fortifications have been delayed only so far as the Corps of Engineers has been inadequate to furnish officers for the necessary superintendence of the works. Under the act confirming the statutes of Virginia and Maryland incorporating the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company three commissioners on the part of the United States have been appointed for opening books and receiving subscriptions in concert with a like number of commissioners appointed on the part of each of those states. A meeting of the commissioners has been post-poned to await the definitive report of the board of engineers. The light-houses and monuments for the safety of our commerce and mariners the works for the security of Plymouth Beach and for the preservation of the islands in Boston Harbor have received the attention required by the laws relating to those objects respectively. The continuation of the Cumberland road the most important of them all after surmounting no inconsiderable difficulty in fixing upon the direction of the road has commenced under the most promising of auspices with the improvements of recent invention in the mode of construction and with advantage of a great reduction in the comparative cost of the work. The operation of the laws relating to the Revolutionary pensioners may deserve the renewed consideration of Congress. The act of 1818-03-18 while it made provision for many meritorious and indigent citizens who had served in the War of Independence opened a door to numerous abuses and impositions. To remedy this the act of 1820-05-01 exacted proofs of absolute indigence which many really in want were unable and all susceptible of that delicacy which is allied to many virtues must be deeply reluctant to give. The result has been that some among the least deserving have been retained and some in whom the requisites both of worth and want were combined have been stricken from the list. As the numbers of these venerable relics of an age gone by diminish; as the decays of body mind and estate of those that survive must in the common course of nature increase should not a more liberal portion of indulgence be dealt out to them? May not the want in most instances be inferred from the demand when the service can be proved and may not the last days of human infirmity be spared the mortification of purchasing a pittance of relief only by the exposure of its own necessities? I submit to Congress the expediency of providing for individual cases of this description by special enactment or of revising the act of 1820-05-01 with a view to mitigate the rigor of its exclusions in favor of persons to whom charity now bestowed can scarcely discharge the debt of justice. The portion of the naval force of the Union in actual service has been chiefly employed on three stations—the Mediterranean the coasts of South America bordering on the Pacific Ocean and the West Indies. An occasional cruiser has been sent to range along the African shores most polluted by the traffic of slaves; one armed vessel has been stationed on the coast of our eastern boundary to cruise along the fishing grounds in Hudsons Bay and on the coast of Labrador and the first service of a new frigate has been performed in restoring to his native soil and domestic enjoyments the veteran hero whose youthful blood and treasure had freely flowed in the cause of our country's independence and whose whole life has been a series of services and sacrifices to the improvement of his fellow men. The visit of General Lafayette alike honorable to himself and to our country closed as it had commenced with the most affecting testimonials of devoted attachment on his part and of unbounded gratitude of this people to him in return. It will form here-after a pleasing incident in the annals of our Union giving to real history the intense interest of romance and signally marking the unpurchasable tribute of a great nation's social affections to the disinterested champion of the liberties of humankind. The constant maintenance of a small squadron in the Mediterranean is a necessary substitute for the humiliating alternative of paying tribute for the security of our commerce in that sea and for a precarious peace at the mercy of every caprice of four Barbary states by whom it was liable to be violated. An additional motive for keeping a respectable force stationed there at this time is found in the maritime war raging between the Greeks and the Turks and in which the neutral navigation of this Union is always in danger of outrage and depredation. A few instances have occurred of such depredations upon our merchant vessels by privateers or pirates wearing the Grecian flag but without real authority from the Greek or any other government. The heroic struggles of the Greeks themselves in which our warmest sympathies as free men and Christians have been engaged have continued to be maintained with vicissitudes of success adverse and favorable. Similar motives have rendered expedient the keeping of a like force on the coasts of Peru and Chile on the Pacific. The irregular and convulsive character of the war upon the shores has been extended to the conflicts upon the ocean. An active warfare has been kept up for years with alternate success though generally to the advantage of the American patriots. But their naval forces have not always been under the control of their own governments. Blockades unjustifiable upon any acknowledged principles of international law have been proclaimed by officers in command and though disavowed by the supreme authorities the protection of our own commerce against them has been made cause of complaint and erroneous imputations against some of the most gallant officers of our Navy. Complaints equally groundless have been made by the commanders of the Spanish royal forces in those seas; but the most effective protection to our commerce has been the flag and the firmness of our own commanding officers. The cessation of the war by the complete triumph of the patriot cause has removed it is hoped all cause of dissension with one party and all vestige of force of the other. But an unsettled coast of many degrees of latitude forming a part of our own territory and a flourishing commerce and fishery extending to the islands of the Pacific and to China still require that the protecting power of the Union should be displayed under its flag as well upon the ocean as upon the land. The objects of the West India Squadron have been to carry into execution the laws for the suppression of the African slave trade; for the protection of our commerce against vessels of piratical character though bearing commissions from either of the belligerent parties; for its protection against open and unequivocal pirates. These objects during the present year have been accomplished more effectually than at any former period. The African slave trade has long been excluded from the use of our flag and if some few citizens of our country have continued to set the laws of the Union as well as those of nature and humanity at defiance by persevering in that abominable traffic it has been only by sheltering themselves under the banners of other nations less earnest for the total extinction of the trade of ours. The active persevering and unremitted energy of Captain Warrington and of the officers and men under his command on that trying and perilous service have been crowned with signal success and are entitled to the approbation of their country. But experience has shown that not even a temporary suspension or relaxation from assiduity can be indulged on that station without reproducing piracy and murder in all their horrors; nor is it probably that for years to come our immensely valuable commerce in those seas can navigate in security without the steady continuance of an armed force devoted to its protection. It were indeed a vain and dangerous illusion to believe that in the present or probable condition of human society a commerce so extensive and so rich as ours could exist and be pursued in safety without the continual support of a military marine—the only arm by which the power of this Confederacy can be estimated or felt by foreign nations and the only standing military force which can never be dangerous to our own liberties at home. A permanent naval peace establishment therefore adapted to our present condition and adaptable to that gigantic growth with which the nation is advancing in its career is among the subjects which have already occupied the foresight of the last Congress and which will deserve your serious deli
