Fellow citizens of the Senate and of the House of Representatives: The assemblage of the representatives of our Union in both Houses of the Congress at this time occurs under circumstances calling for the renewed homage of our grateful acknowledgments to the Giver of All Good. With the exceptions incidental to the most felicitous condition of human existence we continue to be highly favored in all the elements which contribute to individual comfort and to national prosperity. In the survey of our extensive country we have generally to observe abodes of health and regions of plenty. In our civil and political relations we have peace without and tranquillity within our borders. We are as a people increasing with unabated rapidity in population wealth and national resources and whatever differences of opinion exist among us with regard to the mode and the means by which we shall turn the beneficence of Heaven to the improvement of our own condition there is yet a spirit animating us all which will not suffer the bounties of Providence to be showered upon us in vain but will receive them with grateful hearts and apply them with unwearied hands to the advancement of the general good. Of the subjects recommended to Congress at their last session some were then definitively acted upon. Others left unfinished but partly matured will recur to your attention without needing a renewal of notice from me. The purpose of this communication will be to present to your view the general aspect of our public affairs at this moment and the measures which have been taken to carry into effect the intentions of the legislature as signified by the laws then and heretofore enacted. In our intercourse with the other nations of the earth we have still the happiness of enjoying peace and a general good understanding qualified however in several important instances by collisions of interest and by unsatisfied claims of justice to the settlement of which the constitutional interposition of the legislative authority may become ultimately indispensable. By the decease of the Emperor Alexander of Russia which occurred contemporaneously with the commencement of the last session of Congress the United States have been deprived of a long tried steady and faithful friend. Born to the inheritance of absolute power and trained in the school of adversity from which no power on earth however absolute is exempt that monarch from his youth had been taught to feel the force and value of public opinion and to be sensible that the interests of his own government would best be promoted by a frank and friendly intercourse with this Republic as those of his people would be advanced by a liberal intercourse with our country. A candid and confidential interchange of sentiments between him and the government of the U.S. upon the affairs of Southern America took place at a period not long preceding his demise and contributed to fix that course of policy which left to the other governments of Europe no alternative but that of sooner or later recognizing the independence of our southern neighbors of which the example had by the United States already been set. The ordinary diplomatic communications between his successor the Emperor Nicholas and the United States have suffered some interruption by the illness departure and subsequent decease of his minister residing here who enjoyed as he merited the entire confidence of his new sovereign as he had eminently responded to that of his predecessor. But we have had the most satisfactory assurances that the sentiments of the reigning Emperor toward the United States are altogether conformable to those which had so long and constantly animated his imperial brother and we have reason to hope that they will serve to cement that harmony and good understanding between the two nations which founded in congenial interests can not but result in the advancement of the welfare and prosperity of both. Our relations of commerce and navigation with France are by the operation of the convention of 1822-06-24 with that nation in a state of gradual and progressive improvement. Convinced by all our experience no less than by the principles of fair and liberal reciprocity which the United States have constantly tendered to all the nations of the earth as the rule of commercial intercourse which they would universally prefer that fair and equal competition is most conducive to the interests of both parties the United States in the negotiation of that convention earnestly contended for a mutual renunciation of discriminating duties and charges in the ports of the two countries. Unable to obtain the immediate recognition of this principle in its full extent after reducing the duties of discrimination so far as was found attainable it was agreed that at the expiration of two years from 1822-10-01 when the convention was to go into effect unless a notice of six months on either side should be given to the other that the convention itself must terminate those duties should be reduced one-fourth and that this reducation should be yearly repeated until all discrimination should cease while the convention itself should continue in force. By the effect of this stipulation three-fourths of the discriminating duties which had been levied by each party upon the vessels of the other in its ports have already been removed; and on the first of next October should the convention be still in force the remaining one-fourth will be discontinued. French vessels laden with French produce will be received in our ports on the same terms as our own and ours in return will enjoy the same advantages in the ports of France. By these approximations to an equality of duties and of charges not only has the commerce between the two countries prospered but friendly dispositions have been on both sides encouraged and promoted. They will continue to be cherished and cultivated on the part of the United States. It would have been gratifying to have had it in my power to add that the claims upon the justice of the French government involving the property and the comfortable subsistence of many of our fellow citizens and which have been so long and so earnestly urged were in a more promising train of adjustment than at your last meeting; but their condition remains unaltered. With the government of the Netherlands the mutual abandonment of discriminating duties had been regulated by legislative acts on both sides. The act of Congress of 1818-04-20 abolished all discriminating duties of impost and tonnage upon the vessels and produce of the Netherlands in the ports of the United States upon the assurance given by the government of the Netherlands that all such duties operating against the shipping and commerce of the United States in that Kingdom had been abolished. These reciprocal regulations had continued in force several years when the discriminating principle was resumed by the Netherlands in a new and indirect form by a bounty of 10 percent in the shape of a return of duties to their national vessels and in which those of the United States are not permitted to participate. By the act of Congress of 1824-01-07 all discriminating duties in the United States were again suspended so far as related to the vessels and produce of the Netherlands so long as the reciprocal exemption should be extended to the vessels and produce of the United States in the Netherlands. But the same act provides that in the event of a restoration of discriminating duties to operate against the shipping and commerce of the United States in any of the foreign countries referred to therein the suspension of discriminating duties in favor of the navigation of such foreign country should cease and all the provisions of the acts imposing discriminating foreign tonnage and impost duties in the United States should revive and be in full force with regard to that nation. In the correspondence with the government of the Netherlands upon this subject they have contended that the favor shown to their own shipping by this bounty upon their tonnage is not to be considered a discriminating duty; but it can not be denied that it produces all the same effects. Had the mutual abolition been stipulated by treaty such a bounty upon the national vessels could scarcely have been granted consistent with good faith. Yet as the act of Congress of 1824-01-07 has not expressly authorized the Executive authority to determine what shall be considered as a revival of discriminating duties by a foreign government to the disadvantage of the United States and as the retaliatory measure on our part however just and necessary may tend rather to that conflict of legislation which we deprecate than to that concert to which we invite all commercial nations as most conducive to their interest and our own I have thought it more consistent with the spirit of our institutions to refer to the subject again to the paramount authority of the Legislature to decide what measure the emergency may require than abruptly by proclamation to carry into effect the minatory provisions of the act of 1824. During the last session of Congress treaties of amity navigation and commerce were negotiated and signed at this place with the government of Denmark in Europe and with the federation of Central America in this hemisphere. These treaties then received the constitutional sanction of the Senate by the advice and consent to their ratification. They were accordingly ratified on the part of the U.S. and during the recess of Congress have been also ratified by the other respective contracting parties. The ratifications have been exchanged and they have been published by proclamations copies of which are herewith communicated to Congress. These treaties have established between the contracting parties the principles of equality and reciprocity in their broadest and most liberal extent each party admitting the vessels of the other into its ports laden with cargoes the produce or manufacture of any quarter of the globe upon the payment of the same duties of tonnage and impost that are chargeable upon their own. They have further stipulated that the parties shall hereafter grant no favor of navigation or commerce to any other nation which shall not upon the same terms be granted to each other and that neither party will impose upon articles of merchandise the produce or manufacture of the other any other or higher duties than upon the like articles being the produce or manufacture of any other country. To these principles there is in the convention with Denmark an exception with regard to the colonies of that Kingdom in the arctic seas but none with regard to her colonies in the West Indies. In the course of the last summer the term to which our last commercial treaty with Sweden was limited has expired. A continuation of it is in the contemplation of the Swedish government and is believed to be desirable on the part of the United States. It has been proposed by the King of Sweden that pending the negotiation of renewal the expired treaty should be mutually considered as still in force a measure which will require the sanction of Congress to be carried into effect on our part and which I therefore recommend to your consideration. With Prussia Spain Portugal and in general all the European powers between whom and the United States relations of friendly intercourse have existed their condition has not materially varied since the last session of Congress. I regret not to be able to say the same of our commercial intercourse with the colonial possessions of Great Britain in America. Negotiations of the highest importance to our common interests have been for several years in discussion between the two governments and on the part of the United States have been invariably pursued in the spirit of candor and conciliation. Interests of great magnitude and delicacy had been adjusted by the conventions of 1815 and 1818 while that of 1822 mediated by the late Emperor Alexander had promised a satisfactory compromise of claims which the government of the U.S. in justice to the rights of a numerous class of their citizens was bound to sustain. But with regard to the commercial intercourse between the United States and the British colonies in America it has been hitherto found impracticable to bring the parties to an understanding satisfactory to both. The relative geographical position and the respective products of nature cultivated by human industry had constituted the elements of a commercial intercourse between the United States and British America insular and continental important to the inhabitants of both countries; but it had been interdicted by Great Britain upon a principle heretofore practiced upon by the colonizing nations of Europe of holding the trade of their colonies each in exclusive monopoly to herself. After the termination of the late war this interdiction had been revived and the British government declined including this portion of our intercourse with her possessions in the negotiation of the convention of 1815. The trade was then carried on exclusively in British vessels 'til the act of Congress concerning navigation of 1818 and the supplemental act of 1820 met the interdict by a corresponding measure on the part of the United States. These measures not of retaliation but of necessary self defense were soon succeeded by an act of Parliament opening certain colonial ports to the vessels of the United States coming directly from them and to the importation from them of certain articles of our produce burdened with heavy duties and excluding some of the most valuable articles of our exports. The United States opened their ports to British vessels from the colonies upon terms as exactly corresponding with those of the act of Parliament as in the relative position of the parties could be made and a negotiation was commenced by mutual consent with the hope on our part that a reciprocal spirit of accommodation and a common sentiment of the importance of the trade to the interests of the inhabitants of the two countries between whom it must be carried on would ultimately bring the parties to a compromise with which both might be satisfied. With this view the government of the United States had determined to sacrifice something of that entire reciprocity which in all commercial arrangements with foreign powers they are entitled to demand and to acquiesce in some inequalities disadvantageous to ourselves rather than to forego the benefit of a final and permanent adjustment of this interest to the satisfaction of Great Britain herself. The negotiation repeatedly suspended by accidental circumstances was however by mutual agreement and express assent considered as pending and to be speedily resumed. In the mean time another act of Parliament so doubtful and ambiguous in its import as to have been misunderstood by the officers in the colonies who were to carry it into execution opens again certain colonial ports upon new conditions and terms with a threat to close them against any nation which may not accept those terms as prescribed by the British government. This act passed 1825–07 not communicated to the government of the U.S. not understood by the British officers of the customs in the colonies where it was to be enforced was never the less submitted to the consideration of Congress at their last session. With the knowledge that a negotiation upon the subject had long been in progress and pledges given of its resumption at an early day it was deemed expedient to await the result of that negotiation rather than to subscribe implicitly to terms the import of which was not clear and which the British authorities themselves in this hemisphere were not prepared to explain. Immediately after the close of the last session of Congress one of our most distinguished citizens was dispatched as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to Great Britain furnished with instructions which we could not doubt would lead to a conclusion of this long controverted interest upon terms acceptable to Great Britain. Upon his arrival and before he had delivered his letters of credence he was bet by an order of the British council excluding from and after the first of December now current the vessels of the United States from all the colonial British ports excepting those immediately bordering on our territories. In answer to his expostulations upon a measure thus unexpected he is informed that according to the ancient maxims of policy of European nations having colonies their trade is an exclusive possession of the mother country; that all participation in it by other nations is a boon or favor not forming a subject of negotiation but to be regulated by the legislative acts of the power owning the colony; that the British government therefore declines negotiating concerning it and that as the U.S. did not forthwith accept purely and simply the terms offered by the act of Parliament of 1825–07 Great Britain would not now admit the vessels of the United States even upon the terms on which she has opened them to the navigation of other nations. We have been accustomed to consider the trade which we have enjoyed with the British colonies rather as an interchange of mutual benefits than as a mere favor received; that under every circumstance we have given an ample equivalent. We have seen every other nation holding colonies negotiate with other nations and grant them freely admission to the colonies by treaty and so far are the other colonizing nations of Europe now from refusing to negotiate for trade with their colonies that we ourselves have secured access to the colonies of more than one of them by treaty. The refusal however of Great Britain to negotiate leaves to the United States no other alternative than that of regulating or interdicting altogether the trade on their part according as either measure may effect the interests of our own country and with that exclusive object I would recommend the whole subject to your calm and candid deliberations. It is hoped that our unavailing exertions to accomplish a cordial good understanding on this interest will not have an unpropitious effect upon the other great topics of discussion between the two governments. Our northeastern and northwestern boundaries are still unadjusted. The commissioners under the seventh article of the Treaty of Ghent have nearly come to the close of their labors; nor can we renounce the expectation enfeebled as it is that they may agree upon their report to the satisfaction or acquiescence of both parties. The commission for liquidating the claims for indemnity for slaves carried away after the close of the war has been sitting with doubtful prospects of success. Propositions of compromise have however passed between the two governments the result of which we flatter ourselves may yet prove unsatisfactory. Our own dispositions and purposes toward Great Britain are all friendly and conciliatory; nor can we abandon but with strong reluctance the belief that they will ultimately meet a return not of favors which we neither as nor desire but of equal reciprocity and good will. With the American governments of this hemisphere we continue to maintain an intercourse altogether friendly and between their nations and ours that commercial interchange of which mutual benefit is the source of mutual comfort and harmony the result is in a continual state of improvement. The war between Spain and them since the total expulsion of the Spanish military force from their continental territories has been little more than nominal and their internal tranquillity though occasionally menaced by the agitations which civil wars never fail to leave behind them has not been affected by any serious calamity. The congress of ministers from several of those nations which assembled at Panama after a short session there adjourned to meet again at a more favorable season in the neighborhood of Mexico. The decease of one of our ministers on his way to the Isthmus and the impediments of the season which delayed the departure of the other deprived United States of the advantage of being represented at the first meeting of the Congress. There is however no reason to believe that any transactions of the congress were of a nature to affect injuriously the interests of the United States or to require the interposition of our ministers had they been present. Their absence has indeed deprived United States of the opportunity of possessing precise and authentic information of the treaties which were concluded at Panama; and the whole result has confirmed me in the conviction of the expediency to the United States of being represented at the congress. The surviving member of the mission appointed during your last session has accordingly proceeded to his destination and a successor to his distinguished and lamented associate will be nominated to the Senate. A treaty of amity navigation and commerce has in the course of the last summer been concluded by our minister plenipotentiary at Mexico with the united states of that Confederacy which will also be laid before the Senate for their advice with regard to its ratification. In adverting to the present condition of our fiscal concerns and to the prospects of our revenue the first remark that calls our attention is that they are less exuberantly prosperous than they were at the corresponding period of the last year. The severe shock so extensively sustained by the commercial and manufacturing interests in Great Britain has not been without a perceptible recoil upon ourselves. A reduced importation from abroad is necessarily succeeded by a reduced return to the Treasury at home. The net revenue of the present year will not equal that of the last and the receipts of that which is to come will fall short of those in the current year. The diminution however is in part attributable to the flourishing condition of some of our domestic manufactures and so far is compensated by an equivalent more profitable to the nation. It is also highly gratifying to perceive that the deficiency in the revenue while it scarcely exceeds the anticipations of the last year's estimate from the Treasury has not interrupted the application of more than $11 million during the present year to the discharge of the principal and interest of the debt nor the reduction of upward of $7000000 of the capital of the debt itself. The balance in the Treasury on the first of January last was $5201650.43; the receipts from that time to the 30th of September last were $19585932.50; the receipts of the current quarter estimated at $6000000 yield with the sums already received a revenue of about $25500000 for the year; the expenditures for the first three quarters of the year have amounted to $18714226.66; the expenditures of the current quarter are expected including the $2000000 of the principal of the debt to be paid to balance the receipts; so that the expense of the year amounting to upward of $1000000 less than its income will leave a proportionally increased balance in the Treasury on 1827-01-01 over that of the first of January last; instead of $5200000 there will be $6400000. The amount of duties secured on merchandise imported from the commence of the year 'til September 30 is estimated at $21250000 and the amount that will probably accrue during the present quarter is estimated at $4250000 making for the whole year $25500000 from which the draw-backs being deducted will leave a clear revenue from the customs receivable in the year 1827 of about $20400000 which with the sums to be received from the proceeds of public lands the bank dividends and other incidental receipts will form an aggregate of about $23000000 a sum falling short of the whole expenses of the present year little more than the portion of those expenditures applied to the discharge of the public debt beyond the annual appropriation of $10000000 by the act of 1817-03-03. At the passage of that act the public debt amounted to $123500000. On the first of January next it will be short of $74000000. In the lapse of these 10 years $50000000 of public debt with the annual charge of upward of $3000000 of interest upon them have been extinguished. At the passage of tat act of the annual appropriation of $10000000 $7000000 were absorbed in the payment of interest and not more than $3000000 went to reduce the capital of the debt. Of the same $10000000 at this time scarcely $4000000 are applicable to the interest and upward of $6000000 are effective in melting down the capital. Yet our experience has proved that a revenue consisting so largely of imposts and tonnage ebbs and flows to an extraordinary extent with all the fluctuations incident to the general commerce of the world. It is within our recollection that even in the compass of the same last 10 years the receipts of the Treasury were not adequate to the expenditures of the year and that in two successive years it was found necessary to resort to loans to meet the engagements of the nation. The returning tides of the succeeding years replenished the public coffers until they have again begun to feel the vicissitude of a decline. To produce these alternations of fullness and exhaustion the relative operation of abundant or unfruitful seasons the regulations of foreign governments political revolutions the prosperous or decaying condition of manufactures commercial speculations and many other causes not always to be traced variously combine. We have found the alternate swells and diminutions embracing periods of from two to three years. The last period of depression to United States was from 1819 to 1822. The corresponding revival was from 1823 to the commencement of the present year. Still we have no cause to apprehend a depression comparable to that of the former period or even to anticipate a deficiency which will intrench upon the ability to apply the annual $10 million to the reduction of the debt. It is well for us however to be admonished of the necessity of abiding by the maxims of the most vigilant economy and of resorting to all honorable and useful expedients for pursuing with steady and inflexible perseverance the total discharge of the debt. Besides the $7000000 of the loans of 1813 which will have been discharged in the course of the present year there are $9000000 which by the terms of the contracts would have been and are now redeemable. $13000000 more of the loan of 1814 will become redeemable from and after the expiration of the present month and $9000000 other from and after the close of the ensuing year. They constitute a mass of $31000000 all bearing an interest of 6 percent more than $20000000 of which will be immediately redeemable and the rest within little more than a year. Leaving of this amount $15000000 to continue at the interest of 6 percent but to be paid off as far as shall be found practicable in the years 1827 and 1828 there is scarcely a doubt that the remaining $16000000 might within a few months be discharged by a loan at not exceeding 5 percent redeemable in the years 1829 and 1830. By this operation a sum of nearly $500000 may be saved to the nation and the discharge of the whole $31000000 within the four years may be greatly facilitated if not wholly accomplished. By an act of Congress of 1835-03-03 a loan for the purpose now referred to or a subscription to stock was authorized at an interest not exceeding 4.5 percent. But at that time so large a portion of the floating capital of the country was absorbed in commercial speculations and so little was left for investment in the stocks that the measure was but partially successful. At the last session of Congress the condition of the funds was still unpropitious to the measure; but the change so soon afterwards occurred that had the authority existed to redeem the $9 million now redeemable by an exchange of stocks or a loan at 5 percent it is morally certain that it might have been effected and with it a yearly saving of $90000. With regard to the collection of the revenue of imposts certain occurrences have within the last year been disclosed in one or two of our principal ports which engaged the attention of Congress at their last session and may hereafter require further consideration. Until within a very few years the execution of the laws for raising the revenue like that of all our other laws has been insured more by the moral sense of the community than by the rigors of a jealous precaution or by penal sanction. Confiding in the exemplary punctuality and unsullied integrity of our importing merchants a gradual relaxation from the provisions of the collection laws a close adherence to which have caused inconvenience and expense to them had long become habitual and indulgences had been extended universally because they had never been abused. It may be worthy of your serious consideration whether some further legislative provision may not be necessary to come in aid of this state of unguarded security. From the reports herewith communicated of the Secretaries of War and of the Navy with the subsidiary documents annexed to them will be discovered the present condition and administration of our military establishment on the land and on the sea. The organization of the Army having undergone no change since its reduction to the present peace establishment in 1821 it remains only to observe that it is yet found adequate to all the purposes for which a permanent armed force in time of peace can be needed or useful. It may be proper to add that from a difference of opinion between the late President of the United States and the Senate with regard to the construction of the act of Congress of 1821-03-02 to reduce and fix the military peace establishment of the U.S. it remains hitherto so far without execution that no colonel has been appointed to command one of the regiments of artillery. A supplementary or explanatory act of the legislature appears to be the only expedient practicable for removing the difficulty of this appointment. In a period of profound peace the conduct of the mere military establishment forms but a very inconsiderable portion of the duties devolving upon the administration of the Department of War. It will be seen by the returns from the subordinate departments of the Army that every branch of the service is marked with order regularity and discipline; that from the commanding general through all the gradations of superintendence the officers feel themselves to have been citizens before they were soldiers and that the glory of a republican army must consist in the spirit of freedom by which it is animated and of patriotism by which it is impelled. It may be confidently stated that the moral character of the Army is in a state of continual improvement and that all the arrangements for the disposal of its parts have a constant reference to that end. But to the War Department are attributed other duties having indeed relation to a future possible condition of war but being purely defensive and in their tendency contributing rather to the security and permanency of peace—the erection of the fortifications provided for by Congress and adapted to secure our shores from hostile invasion; the distribution of the fund of public gratitude and justice to the pensioners of the Revolutionary war; the maintenance of our relations of peace and protection with the Indian tribes and the internal improvements and surveys for the location of roads and canals which during the last three sessions of Congress have engaged so much of their attention and may engross so large a share of their future benefactions to our country. By the act of 1824-04-30 suggested and approved by my predecessor the sum of $30000 was appropriated for the purpose of causing to be made the necessary surveys plans and estimates of the routes of such roads and canals as the President of the United States might deem of national importance in a commercial or military point of view or necessary for the transportation of the public mail. The surveys plans and estimates for each when completed will be laid before Congress. In execution of this act a board of engineers was immediately instituted and have been since most assiduously and constantly occupied in carrying it into effect. The first object to which their labors were directed by order of the late President was the examination of the country between the tide waters of the Potomac the Ohio and Lake Erie to ascertain the practicability of a communication between them to designate the most suitable route for the same and to form plans 
