Fellow citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives: It affords me pleasure to tender my friendly greetings to you on the occasion of your assembling at the seat of government to enter upon the important duties to which you have been called by the voice of our countrymen. The task devolves on me under a provision of the Constitution to present to you as the federal legislature of 24 sovereign states and 12000000 happy people a view of our affairs and to propose such measures as in the discharge of my official functions have suggested themselves as necessary to promote the objects of our union. In communicating with you for the first time it is to me a source of unfeigned satisfaction calling for mutual gratulation and devout thanks to a benign providence that we are at peace with all man-kind and that our country exhibits the most cheering evidence of general welfare and progressive improvement. Turning our eyes to other nations our great desire is to see our brethren of the human race secured in the blessings enjoyed by ourselves and advancing in knowledge in freedom and in social happiness. Our foreign relations although in their general character pacific and friendly present subjects of difference between us and other powers of deep interest as well to the country at large as to many of our citizens. To effect an adjustment of these shall continue to be the object of my earnest endeavors and not with standing the difficulties of the task I do not allow myself to apprehend unfavorable results. Blessed as our country is with every thing which constitutes national strength she is fully adequate to the maintenance of all her interests. In discharging the responsible trust confided to the executive in this respect it is my settled purpose to ask nothing that is not clearly right and to submit to nothing that is wrong; and I flatter myself that supported by the other branches of the government and by the intelligence and patriotism of the people we shall be able under the protection of providence to cause all our just rights to be respected. Of the unsettled matters between the United States and other powers the most prominent are those which have for years been the subject of negotiation with England France and Spain. The late periods at which our ministers to those governments left the United States render it impossible at this early day to inform you of what has been done on the subjects with which they have been respectively charged. Relying upon the justice of our views in relation to the points committed to negotiation and the reciprocal good feeling which characterizes our intercourse with those nations we have the best reason to hope for a satisfactory adjustment of existing differences. With Great Britain alike distinguished in peace and war we may look forward to years of peaceful honorable and elevated competition. Every thing in the condition and history of the two nations is calculated to inspire sentiments of mutual respect and to carry conviction to the minds of both that it is their policy to preserve the most cordial relations. Such are my own views and it is not to be doubted that such are also the prevailing sentiments of our constituents. Although neither time nor opportunity has been afforded for a full development of the policy which the present cabinet of Great Britain designs to pursue toward this country I indulge the hope that it will be of a just and pacific character; and if this anticipation be realized we may look with confidence to a speedy and acceptable adjustment of our affairs. Under the convention for regulating the reference to arbitration of the disputed points of boundary under the fifth article of the Treaty of Ghent the proceedings have hitherto been conducted in that spirit of candor and liberality which ought ever to characterize the acts of sovereign states seeking to adjust by the most unexceptionable means important and delicate subjects of contention. The first sentiments of the parties have been exchanged and the final replication on our part is in a course of preparation. This subject has received the attention demanded by its great and peculiar importance to a patriotic member of this Confederacy. The exposition of our rights already made is such as from the high reputation of the commissioners by whom it has been prepared we had a right to expect. Our interests at the Court of the Sovereign who has evinced his friendly disposition by assuming the delicate task of arbitration have been committed to a citizen of the state of Maine whose character talents and intimate acquaintance with the subject eminently qualify him for so responsible a trust. With full confidence in the justice of our cause and in the probity intelligence and uncompromising independence of the illustrious arbitrator we can have nothing to apprehend from the result. From France our ancient ally we have a right to expect that justice which becomes the sovereign of a powerful intelligent and magnanimous people. The beneficial effects produced by the commercial convention of 1822 limited as are its provisions are too obvious not to make a salutary impression upon the minds of those who are charged with the administration of her government. Should this result induce a disposition to embrace to their full extent the wholesome principles which constitute our commercial policy our minister to that Court will be found instructed to cherish such a disposition and to aid in conducting it to useful practical conclusions. The claims of our citizens for depredations upon their property long since committed under the authority and in many instances by the express direction of the then existing government of France remain unsatisfied and must therefore continue to furnish a subject of unpleasant discussion and possible collision between the two governments. I cherish however a lively hope founded as well on the validity of those claims and the established policy of all enlightened governments as on the known integrity of the French Monarch that the injurious delays of the past will find redress in the equity of the future. Our minister has been instructed to press these demands on the French government with all the earnestness which is called for by their importance and irrefutable justice and in a spirit that will evince the respect which is due to the feelings of those from whom the satisfaction is required. Our minister recently appointed to Spain has been authorized to assist in removing evils alike injurious to both countries either by concluding a commercial convention upon liberal and reciprocal terms or by urging the acceptance in their full extent of the mutually beneficial provisions of our navigation acts. He has also been instructed to make a further appeal to the justice of Spain in behalf of our citizens for indemnity for spoliations upon our commerce committed under her authority드n appeal which the pacific and liberal course observed on our part and a due confidence in the honor of that government authorize us to expect will not be made in vain. With other European powers our intercourse is on the most friendly footing. In Russia placed by her territorial limits extensive population and great power high in the rank of nations the United States have always found a steadfast friend. Although her recent invasion of Turkey awakened a lively sympathy for those who were exposed to the desolation of war we can not but anticipate that the result will prove favorable to the cause of civilization and to the progress of human happiness. The treaty of peace between these powers having been ratified we can not be insensible to the great benefit to be derived by the commerce of the United States from unlocking the navigation of the Black Sea a free passage into which is secured to all merchant vessels bound to ports of Russia under a flag at peace with the Porte. This advantage enjoyed upon conditions by most of the powers of Europe has hitherto been withheld from us. During the past summer an antecedent but unsuccessful attempt to obtain it was renewed under circumstances which promised the most favorable results. Although these results have fortunately been thus in part attained further facilities to the enjoyment of this new field for the enterprise of our citizens are in my opinion sufficiently desirable to insure to them our most zealous attention. Our trade with Austria although of secondary importance has been gradually increasing and is now so extended as to deserve the fostering care of the government. A negotiation commenced and nearly completed with that power by the late administration has been consummated by a treaty of amity navigation and commerce which will be laid before the Senate. During the recess of Congress our diplomatic relations with Portugal have been resumed. The peculiar state of things in that country caused a suspension of the recognition of the representative who presented himself until an opportunity was had to obtain from our official organ there information regarding the actual and as far as practicable prospective condition of the authority by which the representative in question was appointed. This information being received the application of the established rule of our government in like cases was no longer withheld. Considerable advances have been made during the present year in the adjustment of claims of our citizens upon Denmark for spoliations but all that we have a right to demand from that government in their behalf has not yet been conceded. From the liberal footing however upon which this subject has with the approbation of the claimants been placed by the government together with the uniformly just and friendly disposition which has been evinced by His Danish Majesty there is a reasonable ground to hope that this single subject of difference will speedily be removed. Our relations with the Barbary Powers continue as they have long been of the most favorable character. The policy of keeping an adequate force in the Mediterranean as security for the continuance of this tranquillity will be persevered in as well as a similar one for the protection of our commerce and fisheries in the Pacific. The southern Republics of our own hemisphere have not yet realized all the advantages for which they have been so long struggling. We trust however that the day is not distant when the restoration of peace and internal quiet under permanent systems of government securing the liberty and promoting the happiness of the citizens will crown with complete success their long and arduous efforts in the cause of self-government and enable us to salute them as friendly rivals in all that is truly great and glorious. The recent invasion of Mexico and the effect thereby produced upon her domestic policy must have a controlling influence upon the great question of South American emancipation. We have seen the fell spirit of civil dissension rebuked and perhaps for ever stifled in that Republic by the love of independence. If it be true as appearances strongly indicate the spirit of independence is the master spirit and if a corresponding sentiment prevails in the other States this devotion to liberty can not be without a proper effect upon the counsels of the mother country. The adoption by Spain of a pacific policy toward her former colonies드n event consoling to humanity and a blessing to the world in which she herself can not fail largely to participate듨ay be most reasonably expected. The claims of our citizens upon the South American governments generally are in a train of settlement while the principal part of those upon Brazil have been adjusted and a decree in council ordering bonds to be issued by the minister of the treasury for their amount has received the sanction of His Imperial Majesty. This event together with the exchange of the ratifications of the treaty negotiated and concluded in 1828 happily terminates all serious causes of difference with that power. Measures have been taken to place our commercial relations with Peru upon a better footing than that upon which they have hitherto rested and if met by a proper disposition on the part of that government important benefits may be secured to both countries. Deeply interested as we are in the prosperity of our sister republics and more particularly in that of our immediate neighbor it would be most gratifying to me were I permitted to say that the treatment which we have received at her hands has been as universally friendly as the early and constant solicitude manifested by the United States for her success gave us a right to expect. But it becomes my duty to inform you that prejudices long indulged by a portion of the inhabitants of Mexico against the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States have had an unfortunate influence upon the affairs of the two countries and have diminished that usefulness to his own which was justly to be expected from his talents and zeal. To this cause in a great degree is to be imputed the failure of several measures equally interesting to both parties but particularly that of the Mexican government to ratify a treaty negotiated and concluded in its own capital and under its own eye. Under these circumstances it appeared expedient to give to Mr. Poinsett the option either to return or not as in his judgment the interest of his country might require and instructions to that end were prepared; but before they could be dispatched a communication was received from the government of Mexico through its charge' d'affaires here requesting the recall of our minister. This was promptly complied with and a representative of a rank corresponding with that of the Mexican diplomatic agent near this government was appointed. Our conduct toward that Republic has been uniformly of the most friendly character and having thus removed the only alleged obstacle to harmonious intercourse I can not but hope that an advantageous change will occur in our affairs. In justice to Mr. Poinsett it is proper to say that my immediate compliance with the application for his recall and the appointment of a successor are not to be ascribed to any evidence that the imputation of an improper interference by him in the local politics of Mexico was well founded nor to a want of confidence in his talents or integrity and to add that the truth of the charges has never been affirmed by the federal government of Mexico in its communications with us. I consider it one of the most urgent of my duties to bring to your attention the propriety of amending that part of the Constitution which relates to the election of President and Vice-President. Our system of government was by its framers deemed an experiment and they therefore consistently provided a mode of remedying its defects. To the people belongs the right of electing their Chief Magistrate; it was never designed that their choice should in any case be defeated either by the intervention of electoral colleges or by the agency confided under certain contingencies to the House of Representatives. Experience proves that in proportion as agents to execute the will of the people are multiplied there is danger of their wishes being frustrated. Some may be unfaithful; all are liable to err. So far therefore as the people can with convenience speak it is safer for them to express their own will. The number of aspirants to the Presidency and the diversity of the interests which may influence their claims leave little reason to expect a choice in the first instance and in that event the election must devolve on the House of Representatives where it is obvious the will of the people may not be always ascertained or if ascertained may not be regarded. From the mode of voting by states the choice is to be made by 24 votes and it may often occur that one of these will be controlled by an individual Representative. Honors and offices are at the disposal of the successful candidate. Repeated ballotings may make it apparent that a single individual holds the cast in his hand. May he not be tempted to name his reward? But even without corruption supposing the probity of the Representative to be proof against the powerful motives by which it may be assailed the will of the people is still constantly liable to be misrepresented. One may err from ignorance of the wishes of his constituents; another from a conviction that it is his duty to be governed by his own judgment of the fitness of the candidates; finally although all were inflexibly honest all accurately informed of the wishes of their constituents yet under the present mode of election a minority may often elect a President and when this happens it may reasonably be expected that efforts will be made on the part of the majority to rectify this injurious operation of their institutions. But although no evil of this character should result from such a perversion of the first principle of our system듮hat the majority is to govern들t must be very certain that a President elected by a minority can not enjoy the confidence necessary to the successful discharge of his duties. In this as in all other matters of public concern policy requires that as few impediments as possible should exist to the free operation of the public will. Let us then endeavor so to amend our system that the office of Chief Magistrate may not be conferred upon any citizen but in pursuance of a fair expression of the will of the majority. I would therefore recommend such an amendment of the Constitution as may remove all intermediate agency in the election of the President and Vice President. The mode may be so regulated as to preserve to each state its present relative weight in the election and a failure in the first attempt may be provided for by confining the second to a choice between the two highest candidates. In connection with such an amendment it would seem advisable to limit the service of the Chief Magistrate to a single term of either four or six years. If however it should not be adopted it is worthy of consideration whether a provision disqualifying for office the Representatives in Congress on whom such an election may have devolved would not be proper. While members of Congress can be constitutionally appointed to offices of trust and profit it will be the practice even under the most conscientious adherence to duty to select them for such stations as they are believed to be better qualified to fill than other citizens; but the purity of our government would doubtless be promoted by their exclusion from all appointments in the gift of the President in whose election they may have been officially concerned. The nature of the judicial office and the necessity of securing in the Cabinet and in diplomatic stations of the highest rank the best talents and political experience should perhaps except these from the exclusion. There are perhaps few men who can for any great length of time enjoy office and power without being more or less under the influence of feelings unfavorable to the faithful discharge of their public duties. Their integrity may be proof against improper considerations immediately addressed to themselves but they are apt to acquire a habit of looking with indifference upon the public interests and of tolerating conduct from which an unpracticed man would revolt. Office is considered as a species of property and government rather as a means of promoting individual interests than as an instrument created solely for the service of the people. Corruption in some and in others a perversion of correct feelings and principles divert government from its legitimate ends and make it an engine for the support of the few at the expense of the many. The duties of all public officers are or at least admit of being made so plain and simple that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their performance; and I can not but believe that more is lost by the long continuance of men in office than is generally to be gained by their experience. I submit therefore to your consideration whether the efficiency of the government would not be promoted and official industry and integrity better secured by a general extension of the law which limits appointments to four years. In a country where offices are created solely for the benefit of the people no one man has any more intrinsic right to official station than another. Offices were not established to give support to particular men at the public expense. No individual wrong is therefore done by removal since neither appointment to nor continuance in office is a matter of right. The incumbent became an officer with a view to public benefits and when these require his removal they are not to be sacrificed to private interests. It is the people and they alone who have a right to complain when a bad officer is substituted for a good one. He who is removed has the same means of obtaining a living that are enjoyed by the millions who never held office. The proposed limitation would destroy the idea of property now so generally connected with official station and although individual distress may be some times produced it would by promoting that rotation which constitutes a leading principle in the republican creed give healthful action to the system. No very considerable change has occurred during the recess of Congress in the condition of either our agriculture commerce or manufactures. The operation of the tariff has not proved so injurious to the two former or as beneficial to the latter as was anticipated. Importations of foreign goods have not been sensibly diminished while domestic competition under an illusive excitement has increased the production much beyond the demand for home consumption. The consequences have been low prices temporary embarrassment and partial loss. That such of our manufacturing establishments as are based upon capital and are prudently managed will survive the shock and be ultimately profitable there is no good reason to doubt. To regulate its conduct so as to promote equally the prosperity of these three cardinal interests is one of the most difficult tasks of government; and it may be regretted that the complicated restrictions which now embarrass the intercourse of nations could not by common consent be abolished and commerce allowed to flow in those channels to which individual enterprise always its surest guide might direct it. But we must ever expect selfish legislation in other nations and are therefore compelled to adapt our own to their regulations in the manner best calculated to avoid serious injury and to harmonize the conflicting interests of our agriculture our commerce and our manufactures. Under these impressions I invite your attention to the existing tariff believing that some of its provisions require modification. The general rule to be applied in graduating the duties upon articles of foreign growth or manufacture is that which will place our own in fair competition with those of other countries; and the inducements to advance even a step beyond this point are controlling in regard to those articles which are of primary necessity in time of war. When we reflect upon the difficulty and delicacy of this operation it is important that it should never be attempted but with the utmost caution. Frequent legislation in regard to any branch of industry affecting its value and by which its capital may be transferred to new channels must always be productive of hazardous speculation and loss. In deliberating therefore on these interesting subjects local feelings and prejudices should be merged in the patriotic determination to promote the great interests of the whole. All attempts to connect them with the party conflicts of the day are necessarily injurious and should be discountenanced. Our action upon them should be under the control of higher and purer motives. Legislation subjected to such influences can never be just and will not long retain the sanction of a people whose active patriotism is not bounded by sectional limits nor insensible to that spirit of concession and forbearance which gave life to our political compact and still sustains it. Discarding all calculations of political ascendancy the North the South the East and the West should unite in diminishing any burthen of which either may justly complain. The agricultural interest of our country is so essentially connected with every other and so superior in importance to them all that it is scarcely necessary to invite to it your particular attention. It is principally as manufactures and commerce tend to increase the value of agricultural productions and to extend their application to the wants and comforts of society that they deserve the fostering care of government. Looking forward to the period not far distant when a sinking fund will no longer be required the duties on those articles of importation which can not come in competition with our own productions are the first that should engage the attention of Congress in the modification of the tariff. Of these tea and coffee are the most important. They enter largely into the consumption of the country and have become articles of necessity to all classes. A reduction therefore of the existing duties will be felt as a common benefit but like all other legislation connected with commerce to be efficacious and not injurious it should be gradual and certain. The public prosperity is evinced in the increased revenue arising from the sales of the public lands and in the steady maintenance of that produced by imposts and tonnage not withstanding the additional duties imposed by the act of [1828-05-19] and the unusual importations in the early part of that year. The balance in the Treasury on [1829-01-01] was $5972435.81. The receipts of the current year are estimated at $24602230 and the expenditures for the same time at $26164595 leaving a balance in the Treasury on [1830-01-01] of $4410070.81. There will have been paid on account of the public debt during the present year the sum of $12405005.80 reducing the whole debt of the government on [1830-01-01] to $48565406.50 including $7 million of the 5 percent stock subscribed to the Bank of the United States. The payment on account of public debt made on [1829-07-01] was $8715462.87. It was apprehended that the sudden withdrawal of so large a sum from the banks in which it was deposited at a time of unusual pressure in the money market might cause much injury to the interests dependent on bank accommodations. But this evil was wholly averted by an early anticipation of it at the Treasury aided by the judicious arrangements of the officers of the Bank of the United States. This state of the finances exhibits the resources of the nation in an aspect highly flattering to its industry and auspicious of the ability of government in a very short time to extinguish the public debt. When this shall be done our population will be relieved from a considerable portion of its present burthens and will find not only new motives to patriotic affection but additional means for the display of individual enterprise. The fiscal power of the states will also be increased and may be more extensively exerted in favor of education and other public objects while ample means will remain in the federal government to promote the general weal in all the modes permitted to its authority. After the extinction of the public debt it is not probable that any adjustment of the tariff upon principles satisfactory to the people of the union will until a remote period if ever leave the government without a considerable surplus in the Treasury beyond what may be required for its current service. As then the period approaches when the application of the revenue to the payment of debt will cease the disposition of the surplus will present a subject for the serious deliberation of Congress; and it may be fortunate for the country that it is yet to be decided. Considered in connection with the difficulties which have heretofore attended appropriations for purposes of internal improvement and with those which this experience tells us will certainly arise when ever power over such subjects may be exercised by the central government it is hoped that it may lead to the adoption of some plan which will reconcile the diversified interests of the states and strengthen the bonds which unite them. Every member of the union in peace and in war will be benefited by the improvement of inland navigation and the construction of high ways in the several states. Let us then endeavor to attain this benefit in a mode which will be satisfactory to all. That hitherto adopted has by many of our fellow citizens been deprecated as an infraction of the Constitution while by others it has been viewed as inexpedient. All feel that it has been employed at the expense of harmony in the legislative councils. To avoid these evils it appears to me that the most safe just and federal disposition which could be made of the surplus revenue would be its apportionment among the several states according to their ratio of representation and should this measure not be found warranted by the Constitution that it would be expedient to propose to the states an amendment authorizings it. I regard an appeal to the source of power in cases of real doubt and where its exercise is deemed indispensable to the general welfare as among the most sacred of all our obligations. Upon this country more than any other has in the providence of God been cast the special guardianship of the great principle of adherence to written constitutions. If it fail here all hope in regard to it will be extinguished. That this was intended to be a government of limited and specific and not general powers must be admitted by all and it is our duty to preserve for it the character intended by its framers. If experience points out the necessity for an enlargement of these powers let us apply for it to those for whose benefit it is to be exercised and not undermine the whole system by a resort to over-strained constructions. The scheme has worked well. It has exceeded the hopes of those who devised it and become an object of admiration to the world. We are responsible to our country and to the glorious cause of self-government for the preservation of so great a good. The great mass of legislation relating to our internal affairs was intended to be left where the federal convention found it들n the state governments. Nothing is clearer in my view than that we are chiefly indebted for the success of the Constitution under which we are now acting to the watchful and auxiliary operation of the state authorities. This is not the reflection of a day but belongs to the most deeply rooted convictions of my mind. I can not therefore too strongly or too earnestly for my own sense of its importance warn you against all encroachments upon the legitimate sphere of state sovereignty. Sustained by its healthful and invigorating influence the federal system can never fall. In the collection of the revenue the long credits authorized on goods imported from beyond the Cape of Good Hope are the chief cause of the losses at present sustained. If these were shortened to six nine and 12 months and warehouses provided by government sufficient to receive the goods offered in deposit for security and for debenture and if the right of the United States to a priority of payment out of the estates of its insolvent debtors were more effectually secured this evil would in a great measure be obviated. An authority to construct such houses is therefore with the proposed alteration of the credits recommended to your attention. It is worthy of notice that the laws for the collection and security of the revenue arising from imposts were chiefly framed when the rates of duties on imported goods presented much less temptation for illicit trade than at present exists. There is reason to believe that these laws are in some respects quite insufficient for the proper security of the revenue and the protection of the interests of those who are disposed to observe them. The injurious and demoralizing tendency of a successful system of smuggling is so obvious as not to require comment and can not be too carefully guarded against. I therefore suggest to Congress the propriety of adopting efficient measures to prevent this evil avoiding however as much as possible every unnecessary infringement of individual liberty and embarrassment of fair and lawful business. On an examination of the records of the Treasury I have been forcibly struck with the large
