Fellow Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives In performing my duty at the opening of your present session it gives me pleasure to congratulate you again upon the prosperous condition of our beloved country. Divine Providence has favored us with general health with rich rewards in the fields of agriculture and in every branch of labor and with peace to cultivate and extend the various resources which employ the virtue and enterprise of our citizens. Let us trust that in surveying a scene so flattering to our free institutions our joint deliberations to preserve them may be crowned with success. Our foreign relations continue with but few exceptions to maintain the favorable aspect which they bore in my last annual message and promise to extend those advantages which the principles that regulate our intercourse with other nations are so well calculated to secure. The question of our North East boundary is still pending with Great Britain and the proposition made in accordance with the resolution of the Senate for the establishment of a line according to the treaty of 1783 has not been accepted by that Government. Believing that every disposition is felt on both sides to adjust this perplexing question to the satisfaction of all the parties interested in it the hope is yet indulged that it may be effected on the basis of that proposition. With the Governments of Austria Russia Prussia Holland Sweden and Denmark the best understanding exists. Commerce with all is fostered and protected by reciprocal good will under the sanction of liberal conventional or legal provisions. In the midst of her internal difficulties the Queen of Spain has ratified the convention for the payment of the claims of our citizens arising since 1819. It is in the course of execution on her part and a copy of it is now laid before you for such legislation as may be found necessary to enable those interested to derive the benefits of it. Yielding to the force of circumstances and to the wise counsels of time and experience that power has finally resolved no longer to occupy the unnatural position in which she stood to the new Governments established in this hemisphere. I have the great satisfaction of stating to you that in preparing the way for the restoration of harmony between those who have sprung from the same ancestors who are allied by common interests profess the same religion and speak the same language the United States have been actively instrumental. Our efforts to effect this good work will be persevered in while they are deemed useful to the parties and our entire disinterestedness continues to be felt and understood. The act of Congress to countervail the discriminating duties to the prejudice of our navigation levied in Cuba and Puerto Rico has been transmitted to the minister of the United States at Madrid to be communicated to the Government of the Queen. No intelligence of its receipt has yet reached the Department of State. If the present condition of the country permits the Government to make a careful and enlarged examination of the true interests of these important portions of its dominions no doubt is entertained that their future intercourse with the United States will be placed upon a more just and liberal basis. The Florida archives have not yet been selected and delivered. Recent orders have been sent to the agent of the United States at Havana to return with all that he can obtain so that they may be in Washington before the session of the Supreme Court to be used in the legal questions there pending to which the Government is a party. Internal tranquillity is happily restored to Portugal. The distracted state of the country rendered unavoidable the postponement of a final payment of the just claims of our citizens. Our diplomatic relations will be soon resumed and the long-subsisting friendship with that power affords the strongest guaranty that the balance due will receive prompt attnetion. The first installment due under the convention of indemnity with the King of the Two Sicilies has been duly received and an offer has been made to extinguish the whole by a prompt payment -- an offer I did not consider myself authorized to accept as the indemnification provided is the exclusive property of individual citizens of the United States. The original adjustment of our claims and the anxiety displayed to fulfill at once the stipulations made for the payment of them are highly honorable to the Government of the Two Sicilies. When it is recollected that they were the result of the injustice of an intrusive power temporarily dominant in its territory a repugnance to acknowledge and to pay which would have been neither unnatural nor unexpected the circumstances can not fail to exalt its character for justice and good faith in the eyes of all nations. The treaty of amity and commerce between the United States and Belgium brought to your notice in my last annual message as sanctioned by the Senate but the ratifications of which had not been exchanged owing to a delay in its reception at Brussels and a subsequent absence of the Belgian minister of foreign affairs has been after mature deliberation finally disavowed by that Government as inconsistent with the powers and instructions given to their minister who negotiated it. This disavowal was entirely unexpected as the liberal principles embodied in the convention and which form the ground-work of the objections to it were perfectly satisfactory to the Belgian representative and were supposed to be not only within the powers granted but expressly conformable to the instructions given to him. An offer not yet accepted has been made by Belgium to renew negotiations for a treaty less liberal in its provisions on questions of general maritime law. Our newly established relations with the Sublime Porte promise to be useful to our commerce and satisfactory in every respect to this Government. Our intercourse with the Barbary Powers continues without important change except that the present political state of Algiers has induced me to terminate the residence there of a salaried consul and to substitute an ordinary consulate to remain so long as the place continues in the possession of France. Our first treaty with one of these powers the Emperor of Morocco was formed in 1786 and was limited to fifty years. That period has almost expired. I shall take measures to renew it with the greater satisfaction as its stipulations are just and liberal and have been with mutual fidelity and reciprocal advantage scrupulously fulfilled. Intestine dissensions have too frequently occurred to mar the prosperity interrupt the commerce and distract the governments of most of the nations of this hemisphere which have separated themselves from Spain. When a firm and permanent understanding with the parent country shall have produced a formal acknowledgment of their independence and the idea of danger from that quarter can be no longer entertained the friends of freedom expect that those countries so favored by nature will be distinguished for their love of justice and their devotion to those peaceful arts the assiduous cultivation of which confers honor upon nations and gives value to human life. In the mean time I confidently hope that the apprehensions entertained that some of the people of these luxuriant regions may be tempted in a moment of unworthy distrust of their own capacity for the enjoyment of liberty to commit the too common error of purchasing present repose by bestowing on some favorite leaders the fatal gift of irresponsible power will not be realized. With all these Governments and with that of Brazil no unexpected changes in our relations have occurred during the present year. Frequent causes of just complaint have arisen upon the part of the citizens of the United States some times from the irregular action of the constituted subordinate authorities of the maritime regions and some times from the leaders or partisans of those in arms against the established Governments. In all cases representations have been or will be made and as soon as their political affairs are in a settled position it is expected that our friendly remonstrances will be followed by adequate redress. The Government of Mexico made known in [1833] December last the appointment of commissioners and a surveyor on its part to run in conjunction with ours the boundary line between its territories and the United States and excused the delay for the reasons anticipated -- the prevalence of civil war. The commissioners and surveyors not having met within the time stipulated by the treaty a new arrangement became necessary and our charg? d'affaires was instructed in [1833] January to negotiate in Mexico an article additional to the pre-existing treaty. This instruction was acknowledged and no difficulty was apprehended in the accomplishment of that object. By information just received that additional article to the treaty will be obtained and transmitted to this country as soon as it can receive the ratification of the Mexican Congress. The reunion of the three States of New Grenada Venezuela and Equador forming the Republic of Colombia seems every day to become more improbable. The commissioners of the two first are understood to be now negotiating a just division of the obligations contracted by them when united under one government. The civil war in Equador it is believed has prevented even the appointment of a commissioner on its part. I propose at an early day to submit in the proper form the appointment of a diplomatic agent to Venezuela the importance of the commerce of that country to the United States and the large claims of our citizens upon the Government arising before and since the division of Colombia rendering it in my judgment improper longer to delay this step. Our representatives to Central America Peru and Brazil are either at or on their way to their respective posts. From the Argentine Republic from which a minister was expected to this Government nothing further has been heard. Occasion has been taken on the departure of a new consul to Buenos Ayres to remind that Government that its long delayed minister whose appointment had been made known to us had not arrived. It becomes my unpleasant duty to inform you that this pacific and highly gratifying picture of our foreign relations does not include those with France at this time. It is not possible that any Government and people could be more sincerely desirous of conciliating a just and friendly intercourse with another nation than are those of the United States with their ancient ally and friend. This disposition is founded as well on the most grateful and honorable recollections associated with our struggle for independence as upon a well grounded conviction that it is consonant with the true policy of both. The people of the United States could not therefore see without the deepest regret even a temporary interruption of the friendly relations between the two countries -- a regret which would I am sure be greatly aggravated if there should turn out to be any reasonable ground for attributing such a result to any act of omission or commission on our part. I derive therefore the highest satisfaction from being able to assure you that the whole course of this Government has been characterized by a spirit so conciliatory and for bearing as to make it impossible that our justice and moderation should be questioned what ever may be the consequences of a longer perseverance on the part of the French Government in her omission to satisfy the conceded claims of our citizens. The history of the accumulated and unprovoked aggressions upon our commerce committed by authority of the existing Governments of France between the years 1800 and 1817 has been rendered too painfully familiar to Americans to make its repetition either necessary or desirable. It will be sufficient here to remark that there has for many years been scarcely a single administration of the French Government by whom the justice and legality of the claims of our citizens to indemnity were not to a very considerable extent admitted and yet near a quarter of a century has been wasted in ineffectual negotiations to secure it. Deeply sensible of the injurious effects resulting from this state of things upon the interests and character of both nations I regarded it as among my first duties to cause one more effort to be made to satisfy France that a just and liberal settlement of our claims was as well due to her own honor as to their incontestable validity. The negotiation for this purpose was commenced with the late Government of France and was prosecuted with such success as to leave no reasonable ground to doubt that a settlement of a character quite as liberal as that which was subsequently made would have been effected had not the revolution by which the negotiation was cut off taken place. The discussions were resumed with the present Government and the result showed that we were not wrong in supposing that an event by which the two Governments were made to approach each other so much nearer in their political principles and by which the motives for the most liberal and friendly intercourse were so greatly multiplied could exercise no other than a salutary influence upon the negotiation. After the most deliberate and thorough examination of the whole subject a treaty between the two Governments was concluded and signed at Paris on 1831-07-04 by which it was stipulated that "the French Government in order to liberate itself from all the reclamations preferred against it by citizens of the United States for unlawful seizures captures sequestrations confiscations or destruction of their vessels cargoes or other property engages to pay a sum of 25000000 francs to the United States who shall distribute it among those entitled in the manner and according to the rules it shall determine"; and it was also stipulated on the part of the French Government that this 25000000 francs should "be paid at Paris in six annual installments of 4166666 francs and 66 centimes each into the hands of such person or persons "as shall be authorized by the Government of the US to receive it" the first installment to be paid "at the expiration of one year next following the exchange of the ratifications of this convention and the others at successive intervals of a year one after another 'til the whole shall be paid. To the amount of each of the said installments shall be added interest at 4% thereupon as upon the other installments then remaining unpaid the said interest to be computed from the day of the exchange of the present convention". It was also stipulated on the part of the United States for the purpose of being completely liberated from all the reclamations presented by France on behalf of its citizens that the sum of 1500000 francs should be paid to the Government of France in six annual installments to be deducted out of the annual sums which France had agreed to pay interest thereupon being in like manner computed from the day of the exchange of the ratifications. In addition to this stipulation important advantages were secured to France by the following article viz: The wines of France from and after the exchange of the ratifications of the present conventions shall be admitted to consumption in the States of the Union at duties which shall not exceed the following rates by the gallon (such as it is used at present for wines in the US) to wit: 6 cents for red wines in casks; 10 cents for white wines in casks and 22 cents for wines of all sorts in bottles. The proportions existing between the duties on French wines thus reduced and the general rates of the tariff which went into operation 1829-01-01 shall be maintained in case the Government of the United States should think proper to diminish those general rates in a new tariff. In consideration of this stipulation which shall be binding on the United States for 10 years the French Government abandons the reclamations which it had formed in relation to the 8th article of the treaty of cession of Louisiana. It engages moreover to establish on the long-staple cottons of the United States which after the exchange of the ratifications of the present convention shall be brought directly thence to France by the vessels of the US or by French vessels the same duties as on short-staple cotton. This treaty was duly ratified in the manner prescribed by the constitutions of both countries and the ratification was exchanged at the city of Washington on 1832-02-02. On account of its commercial stipulations it was in five days thereafter laid before the Congress of the United States which proceeded to enact such laws favorable to the commerce of France as were necessary to carry it into full execution and France has from that period to the present been in the unrestricted enjoyment of the valuable privileges that were thus secured to her. The faith of the French nation having been thus solemnly pledged through its constitutional organ for the liquidation and ultimate payment of the long deferred claims of our citizens as also for the adjustment of other points of great and reciprocal benefits to both countries and the United States having with a fidelity and promptitude by which their conduct will I trust be always characterized done every thing that was necessary to carry the treaty into full and fair effect on their part counted with the most perfect confidence on equal fidelity and promptitude on the part of the French Government. In this reasonable expectation we have been I regret to inform you wholly disappointed. No legislative provision has been made by France for the execution of the treaty either as it respects the indemnity to be paid or the commercial benefits to be secured to the United States and the relations between the United States and that power in consequence thereof are placed in a situation threatening to interrupt the good understanding which has so long and so happily existed between the two nations. Not only has the French Government been thus wanting in the performance of the stipulations it has so solemnly entered into with the United States but its omissions have been marked by circumstances which would seem to leave us without satisfactory evidences that such performance will certainly take place at a future period. Advice of the exchange of ratifications reached Paris prior to 1832-04-08. The French Chambers were then sitting and continued in session until 1832-04-21 and although one installment of the indemnity was payable on 1833-02-02 one year after the exchange of ratifications no application was made to the Chambers for the required appropriation and in consequence of no appropriation having then been made the draft of the United States Government for that installment was dishonored by the minister of finance and the United States thereby involved in much controversy. The next session of the Chambers commenced on 1832-11-19 and continued until 1833-04-25. Not withstanding the omission to pay the first installment had been made the subject of earnest remonstrance on our part the treaty with the United States and a bill making the necessary appropriations to execute it were not laid before the Chamber of Deputies until 1833-04-06 nearly five months after its meeting and only nineteen days before the close of the session. The bill was read and referred to a committee but there was no further action upon it. The next session of the Chambers commenced on 1833-04-26 and continued until 1833-06-26. A new bill was introduced on 1833-06-11 but nothing important was done in relation to it during the session. In 1834 April nearly three years after the signature of the treaty the final action of the French Chambers upon the bill to carry the treaty into effect was obtained and resulted in a refusal of the necessary appropriations. The avowed grounds upon which the bill was rejected are to be found in the published debates of that body and no observations of mine can be necessary to satisfy Congress of their utter insufficiency. Although the gross amount of the claims of our citizens is probably greater than will be ultimately allowed by the commissioners sufficient is never the less shown to render it absolutely certain that the indemnity falls far short of the actual amount of our just claims independently of the question of damages and interest for the detention. That the settlement involved a sacrifice in this respect was well known at the time -- a sacrifice which was cheerfully acquiesced in by the different branches of the Federal Government whose action upon the treaty was required from a sincere desire to avoid further collision upon this old and disturbing subject and in the confident expectation that the general relations between the two countries would be improved thereby. The refusal to vote the appropriation the news of which was received from our minister in Paris about 1834-05-15 might have been considered the final determination of the French Government not to execute the stipulations of the treaty and would have justified an immediate communication of the facts to Congress with a recommendation of such ultimate measures as the interest and honor of the United States might seem to require. But with the news of the refusal of the Chambers to make the appropriation were conveyed the regrets of the King and a declaration that a national vessel should be forthwith sent out with instructions to the French minister to give the most ample explanations of the past and the strongest assurances for the future. After a long passage the promised dispatch vessel arrived. The pledges given by the French minister upon receipt of his instructions were that as soon after the election of the new members as the charter would permit the legislative Chambers of France should be called together and the proposition for an appropriation laid before them; that all the constitutional powers of the King and his cabinet should be exerted to accomplish the object and that the result should be made known early enough to be communicated to Congress at the commencement of the present session. Relying upon these pledges and not doubting that the acknowledged justice of our claims the promised exertions of the King and his cabinet and above all that sacred regard for the national faith and honor for which the French character has been so distinguished would secure an early execution of the treaty in all its parts I did not deem it necessary to call the attention of Congress to the subject at the last session. I regret to say that the pledges made through the minister of France have not been redeemed. The new Chambers met on 1834-07-31 and although the subject of fulfilling treaties was alluded to in the speech from the throne no attempt was made by the King or his cabinet to procure an appropriation to carry it into execution. The reasons given for this omission although they might be considered sufficient in an ordinary case are not consistent with the expectations founded upon the assurances given here for there is no constitutional obstacle to entering into legislative business at the first meeting of the Chambers. This point however might have been over-looked had not the Chambers instead of being called to meet at so early a day that the result of their deliberations might be communicated to me before the meeting of Congress been prorogued to 1834-12-29 -- a period so late that their decision can scarcely be made known to the present Congress prior to its dissolution. To avoid this delay our minister in Paris in virtue of the assurance given by the French minister in the United States strongly urged the convocation of the Chambers at an earlier day but without success. It is proper to remark however that this refusal has been accompanied with the most positive assurances on the part of the executive government of France of their intention to press the appropriation at the ensuing session of the Chambers. The executive branch of this Government has as matters stand exhausted all the authority upon the subject with which it is invested and which it had any reason to believe could be beneficially employed. The idea of acquiescing in the refusal to execute the treaty will not I am confident be for a moment entertained by any branch of this Government and further negotiation upon the subject is equally out of the question. If it shall be the pleasure of Congress to await the further action of the French Chambers no further consideration of the subject will at this session probably be required at your hands. But if from the original delay in asking for an appropriation from the refusal of the Chambers to grant it when asked from the omission to bring the subject before the Chambers at their last session from the fact that including that session there have been five different occasions when the appropriation might have been made and from the delay in convoking the Chambers until some weeks after the meeting of Congress when it was well known that a communication of the whole subject to Congress at the last session was prevented by assurances that it should be disposed of before its present meeting you should feel yourselves constrained to doubt whether it be the intention of the French Government in all its branches to carry the treaty into effect and think that such measures as the occasion may be deemed to call for should be now adopted the important question arises what those measures shall be. Our institutions are essentially pacific. Peace and friendly intercourse with all nations are as much the desire of our Government as they are the interest of our people. But these objects are not to be permanently secured by surrendering the rights of our citizens or permitting solemn treaties for their indemnity in cases of flagrant wrong to be abrogated or set aside. It is undoubtedly in the power of Congress seriously to affect the agricultural and manufacturing interests of France by the passage of laws relating to her trade with the United States. Her products manufactures and tonnage may be subjected to heavy duties in our ports or all commercial intercourse with her may be suspended. But there are powerful and to my mind conclusive objections to this mode of proceeding. We can not embarrass or cut off the trade of France without at the same time in some degree embarrassing or cutting off our own trade. The injury of such a warfare must fall though unequally upon our own citizens and could not but impair the means of the Government and weaken that united sentiment in support of the rights and honor of the nation which must now pervade every bosom. Nor is it impossible that such a course of legislation would introduce once more into our national councils those disturbing questions in relation to the tariff of duties which have been so recently put to rest. Besides by every measure adopted by the Government of the United Sstates with the view of injuring France the clear perception of right which will induce our own people and the rulers and people of all other nations even of France herself to pronounce our quarrel just will be obscured and the support rendered to us in a final resort to more decisive measures will be more limited and equivocal. There is but one point of controversy and upon that the whole civilized world must pronounce France to be in the wrong. We insist that she shall pay us a sum of money which she has acknowledged to be due and of the justice of this demand there can be but one opinion among mankind. True policy would seem to dictate that the question at issue should be kept thus disencumbered and that not the slightest pretense should be given to France to persist in her refusal to make payment by any act on our part affecting the interests of her people. The question should be left as it is now in such an attitude that when France fulfills her treaty stipulations all controversy will be at an end. It is my conviction that the United States ought to insist on a prompt execution of the treaty and in case it be refused or longer delayed take redress into their own hands. After the delay on the part of France of a quarter of a century in acknowledging these claims by treaty it is not to be tolerated that another quarter of a century is to be wasted in negotiating about the payment. The laws of nations provide a remedy for such occasions. It is a well-settled principle of the international code that where one nation owes another a liquidated debt which it refuses or neglects to pay the aggrieved party may seize on the property belonging to the other its citizens or subjects sufficient to pay the debt without giving just cause of war. This remedy has been repeatedly resorted to and recently by France herself toward Portugal under circumstances less unquestionable. The time at which resort should be had to this or any other mode of redress is a point to be decided by Congress. If an appropriation shall not be made by the French Chambers at their next session it may justly be concluded that the Government of France has finally determined to disregard its own solemn undertaking and refuse to pay an acknowledged debt. In that event every day's delay on our part will be a stain upon our national honor as well as a denial of justice to our injured citizens. Prompt measures when the refusal of France shall be complete will not only be most honorable and just but will have the best effect upon our national character. Since France in violation of the pledges given through her minister here has delayed her final action so long that her decision will not probably be known in time to be communicated to this Congress I recommend that a law be passed authorizing reprisals upon French property in case provision shall not be made for the payment of the debt at the approaching session of the French Chambers. Her pride and power are too well known to expect any thing from her fears and preclude the necessity of a declaration that nothing partaking of the character of intimidation is intended by us. She ought to look upon it as the evidence only of an inflexible determination on the part of the United States to insist on their rights. That Government by doing only what it has itself acknowledged to be just will be able to spare the United States the necessity of taking redress into their own hands and save the property of French citizens from that seizure and sequestration which American citizens so long endured without retaliation or redress. If she should continue to refuse that act of acknowledged justice and in violation of the law of nations make reprisals on our part the occasion of hostilities against the United States she would but add violence to injustice and could not fail to expose herself to the just censure of civilized nations and to the retributive judgments of Heaven. Collision with France is the more to be regretted on account of the position she occupies in Europe in relation to liberal institutions but in maintaining our national rights and honor all governments are alike to us. If by a collision with France in a case where she is clearly in the wrong the march of liberal principles shall be impeded the responsibility for that result as well as every other will rest on her own head. Having submitted these considerations it belongs to Congress to decide whether after what has taken place it will still await the further action of the French Chambers or now adopt such provisional measures as it may deem necessary and best adapted to protect the rights and maintain the honor of the country. What ever that decision may be it will be faithfully enforced by the Executive as far as he is authorized so to do. According to the estimate of the Treasury Department the revenue accruing from all sources during the present year will amount to $20624717 which with the balance remaining in the Treasury on 1834-01-01 of $11702905 produces an aggregate of $32327623. The total expenditure during the year for all objects including the public debt is estimated at $25591390 which will leave a balance in the Treasury on 1835-01-01 of $6736232. In this balance however will be included about $1150000 of what was heretofore reported by the Department as not effective. Of former appropriations it is estimated that there will remain unexpended at the close of the year $8002925 and that of this sum there will not be required more than $5141964 to accomplish the objects of all the current appropriations. Thus it appears that after satisfying all those appropriations and aft
