Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives: The act of the 23d of June 1836 regulating the deposits of the public money and directing the employment of State District and Territorial banks for that purpose made it the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to discontinue the use of such of them as should at any time refuse to redeem their notes in specie and to substitute other banks provided a sufficient number could be obtained to receive the public deposits upon the terms and conditions therein prescribed. The general and almost simultaneous suspension of specie payments by the banks in May last rendered the performance of this duty imperative in respect to those which had been selected under the act and made it at the same time impracticable to employ the requisite number of others upon the prescribed conditions. The specific regulations established by Congress for the deposit and safe-keeping of the public moneys having thus unexpectedly become inoperative I felt it to be my duty to afford you an early opportunity for the exercise of your supervisory powers over the subject. I was also led to apprehend that the suspension of specie payments increasing the embarrassments before existing in the pecuniary affairs of the country would so far diminish the public revenue that the accruing receipts into the Treasury would not with the reserved five millions be sufficient to defray the unavoidable expenses of the Government until the usual period for the meeting of Congress whilst the authority to call upon the States for a portion of the sums deposited with them was too restricted to enable the Department to realize a sufficient amount from that source. These apprehensions have been justified by subsequent results which render it certain that this deficiency will occur if additional means be not provided by Congress. The difficulties experienced by the mercantile interest in meeting their engagements induced them to apply to me previously to the actual suspension of specie payments for indulgence upon their bonds for duties and all the relief authorized by law was promptly and cheerfully granted. The dependence of the Treasury upon the avails of these bonds to enable it to make the deposits with the States required by law led me in the outset to limit this indulgence to the 1st of September but it has since been extended to the 1st of October that the matter might be submitted to your further direction. Questions were also expected to arise in the recess in respect to the October installment of those deposits requiring the interposition of Congress. A provision of another act passed about the same time and intended to secure a faithful compliance with the obligation of the United States to satisfy all demands upon them in specie or its equivalent prohibited the offer of any bank note not convertible on the spot into gold or silver at the will of the holder; and the ability of the Government with millions on deposit to meet its engagements in the manner thus required by law was rendered very doubtful by the event to which I have referred. Sensible that adequate provisions for these unexpected exigencies could only be made by Congress; convinced that some of them would be indispensably necessary to the public service before the regular period of your meeting and desirous also to enable you to exercise at the earliest moment your full constitutional powers for the relief of the country I could not with propriety avoid subjecting you to the inconvenience of assembling at as early a day as the state of the popular representation would permit. I am sure that I have done but justice to your feelings in believing that this inconvenience will be cheerfully encountered in the hope of rendering your meeting conducive to the good of the country. During the earlier stages of the revulsion through which we have just passed much acrimonious discussion arose and great diversity of opinion existed as to its real causes. This was not surprising. The operations of credit are so diversified and the influences which affect them so numerous and often so subtle that even impartial and well-informed persons are seldom found to agree in respect to them. To inherent difficulties were also added other tendencies which were by no means favorable to the discovery of truth. It was hardly to be expected that those who disapproved the policy of the Government in relation to the currency would in the excited state of public feeling produced by the occasion fail to attribute to that policy any extensive embarrassment in the monetary affairs of the country. The matter thus became connected with the passions and conflicts of party; opinions were more or less affected by political considerations and differences were prolonged which might otherwise have been determined by an appeal to facts by the exercise of reason or by mutual concession. It is however a cheering reflection that circumstances of this nature can not prevent a community so intelligent as ours from ultimately arriving at correct conclusions. Encouraged by the firm belief of this truth I proceed to state my views so far as may be necessary to a clear understanding of the remedies I feel it my duty to propose and of the reasons by which I have been led to recommend them. The history of trade in the United States for the last three or four years affords the most convincing evidence that our present condition is chiefly to be attributed to overaction in all the departments of business--an over-action deriving perhaps its first impulses from antecedent causes but stimulated to its destructive consequences by excessive issues of bank paper and by other facilities for the acquisition and enlargement of credit. At the commencement of the year 1834 the banking capital of the United States including that of the national bank then existing amounted to about $200000000 the bank notes then in circulation to about ninety-five millions and the loans and discounts of the banks to three hundred and twenty-four millions. Between that time and the 1st of January 1836 being the latest period to which accurate accounts have been received our banking capital was increased to more than two hundred and fifty-one millions our paper circulation to more than one hundred and forty millions and the loans and discounts to more than four hundred and fifty-seven millions. To this vast increase are to be added the many millions of credit acquired by means of foreign loans contracted by the States and State institutions and above all by the lavish accommodations extended by foreign dealers to our merchants. The consequences of this redundancy of credit and of the spirit of reckless speculation engendered by it were a foreign debt contracted by our citizens estimated in March last at more than $30000000; the extension to traders in the interior of our country of credits for supplies greatly beyond the wants of the people; the investment of $39500000 in unproductive public lands in the years 1835 and 1836 whilst in the preceding year the sales amounted to only four and a half millions; the creation of debts to an almost countless amount for real estate in existing or anticipated cities and villages equally unproductive and at prices now seen to have been greatly disproportionate to their real value; the expenditure of immense sums in improvements which in many cases have been found to be ruinously improvident; the diversion to other pursuits of much of the labor that should have been applied to agriculture thereby contributing to the expenditure of large sums in the importation of grain from Europe--an expenditure which amounting in 1834 to about $250000 was in the first two quarters of the present year increased to more than $2000000; and finally without enumerating other injurious results the rapid growth among all classes and especially in our great commercial towns of luxurious habits founded too often on merely fancied wealth and detrimental alike to the industry the resources and the morals of our people. It was so impossible that such a state of things could long continue that the prospect of revulsion was present to the minds of considerate men before it actually came. None however had correctly anticipated its severity. A concurrence of circumstances inadequate of themselves to produce such widespread and calamitous embarrassments tended so greatly to aggravate them that they can not be overlooked in considering their history. Among these may be mentioned as most prominent the great loss of capital sustained by our commercial emporium in the fire of December 1835--a loss the effects of which were underrated at the time because postponed for a season by the great facilities of credit then existing; the disturbing effects in our commercial cities of the transfers of the public moneys required by the deposit law of June 1836 and the measures adopted by the foreign creditors of our merchants to reduce their debts and to withdraw from the United States a large portion of our specie. However unwilling any of our citizens may heretofore have been to assign to these causes the chief instrumentality in producing the present state of things the developments subsequently made and the actual condition of other commercial countries must as it seems to me dispel all remaining doubts upon the subject. It has since appeared that evils similar to those suffered by ourselves have been experienced in Great Britain on the Continent and indeed throughout the commercial world and that in other countries as well as in our own they have been uniformly preceded by an undue enlargement of the boundaries of trade prompted as with us by unprecedented expansions of the systems of credit. A reference to the amount of banking capital and the issues of paper credits put in circulation in Great Britain by banks and in other ways during the years 1834 1835 and 1836 will show an augmentation of the paper currency there as much disproportioned to the real wants of trade as in the United States. With this redundancy of the paper currency there arose in that country also a spirit of adventurous speculation embracing the whole range of human enterprise. Aid was profusely given to projected improvements; large investments were made in foreign stocks and loans; credits for goods were granted with unbounded liberality to merchants in foreign countries and all the means of acquiring and employing credit were put in active operation and extended in their effects to every department of business and to every quarter of the globe. The reaction was proportioned in its violence to the extraordinary character of the events which preceded it. The commercial community of Great Britain were subjected to the greatest difficulties and their debtors in this country were not only suddenly deprived of accustomed and expected credits but called upon for payments which in the actual posture of things here could only be made through a general pressure and at the most ruinous sacrifices. In view of these facts it would seem impossible for sincere inquirers after truth to resist the conviction that the causes of the revulsion in both countries have been substantially the same. Two nations the most commercial in the world enjoying but recently the highest degree of apparent prosperity and maintaining with each other the closest relations are suddenly in a time of profound peace and without any great national disaster arrested in their career and plunged into a state of embarrassment and distress. In both countries we have witnessed the same redundancy of paper money and other facilities of credit; the same spirit of speculation; the same partial successes; the same difficulties and reverses and at length nearly the same overwhelming catastrophe. The most material difference between the results in the two countries has only been that with us there has also occurred an extensive derangement in the fiscal affairs of the Federal and State Governments occasioned by the suspension of specie payments by the banks. The history of these causes and effects in Great Britain and the United States is substantially the history of the revulsion in all other commercial countries. The present and visible effects of these circumstances on the operations of the Government and on the industry of the people point out the objects which call for your immediate attention. They are to regulate by law the safe-keeping transfer and disbursement of the public moneys; to designate the funds to be received and paid by the Government; to enable the Treasury to meet promptly every demand upon it; to prescribe the terms of indulgence and the mode of settlement to be adopted as well in collecting from individuals the revenue that has accrued as in withdrawing it from former depositories; and to devise and adopt such further measures within the constitutional competency of Congress as will be best calculated to revive the enterprise and to promote the prosperity of the country. For the deposit transfer and disbursement of the revenue national and State banks have always with temporary and limited exceptions been heretofore employed; but although advocates of each system are still to be found it is apparent that the events of the last few months have greatly augmented the desire long existing among the people of the United States to separate the fiscal operations of the Government from those of individuals or corporations. Again to create a national bank as a fiscal agent would be to disregard the popular will twice solemnly and unequivocally expressed. On no question of domestic policy is there stronger evidence that the sentiments of a large majority are deliberately fixed and I can not concur with those who think they see in recent events a proof that these sentiments are or a reason that they should be changed. Events similar in their origin and character have heretofore frequently occurred without producing any such change and the lessons of experience must be forgotten if we suppose that the present overthrow of credit would have been prevented by the existence of a national bank. Proneness to excessive issues has ever been the vice of the banking system--a vice as prominent in national as in State institutions. This propensity is as subservient to the advancement of private interests in the one as in the other and those who direct them both being principally guided by the same views and influenced by the same motives will be equally ready to stimulate extravagance of enterprise by improvidence of credit. How strikingly is this conclusion sustained by experience! The Bank of the United States with the vast powers conferred on it by Congress did not or could not prevent former and similar embarrassments nor has the still greater strength it has been said to possess under its present charter enabled it in the existing emergency to check other institutions or even to save itself. In Great Britain where it has been seen the same causes have been attended with the same effects a national bank possessing powers far greater than are asked for by the warmest advocates of such an institution here has also proved unable to prevent an undue expansion of credit and the evils that flow from it. Nor can I find any tenable ground for the reestablishment of a national bank in the derangement alleged at present to exist in the domestic exchanges of the country or in the facilities it may be capable of affording them. Although advantages of this sort were anticipated when the first Bank of the United States was created they were regarded as an incidental accommodation not one which the Federal Government was bound or could be called upon to furnish. This accommodation is now indeed after the lapse of not many years demanded from it as among its first duties and an omission to aid and regulate commercial exchange is treated as a ground of loud and serious complaint. Such results only serve to exemplify the constant desire among some of our citizens to enlarge the powers of the Government and extend its control to subjects with which it should not interfere. They can never justify the creation of an institution to promote such objects. On the contrary they justly excite among the community a more diligent inquiry into the character of those operations of trade toward which it is desired to extend such peculiar favors. The various transactions which bear the name of domestic exchanges differ essentially in their nature operation and utility. One class of them consists of bills of exchange drawn for the purpose of transferring actual capital from one part of the country to another or to anticipate the proceeds of property actually transmitted. Bills of this description are highly useful in the movements of trade and well deserve all the encouragement which can rightfully be given to them. Another class is made up of bills of exchange not drawn to transfer actual capital nor on the credit of property transmitted but to create fictitious capital partaking at once of the character of notes discounted in bank and of bank notes in circulation and swelling the mass of paper credits to a vast extent in the most objectionable manner. These bills have formed for the last few years a large proportion of what are termed the domestic exchanges of the country serving as the means of usurious profit and constituting the most unsafe and precarious paper in circulation. This species of traffic instead of being upheld ought to be discountenanced by the Government and the people. In transferring its funds from place to place the Government is on the same footing with the private citizen and may resort to the same legal means. It may do so through the medium of bills drawn by itself or purchased from others; and in these operations it may in a manner undoubtedly constitutional and legitimate facilitate and assist exchanges of individuals founded on real transactions of trade. The extent to which this may be done and the best means of effecting it are entitled to the fullest consideration. This has been bestowed by the Secretary of the Treasury and his views will be submitted to you in his report. But it was not designed by the Constitution that the Government should assume the management of domestic or foreign exchange. It is indeed authorized to regulate by law the commerce between the States and to provide a general standard of value or medium of exchange in gold and silver but it is not its province to aid individuals in the transfer of their funds otherwise than through the facilities afforded by the Post-Office Department. As justly might it be called on to provide for the transportation of their merchandise. These are operations of trade. They ought to be conducted by those who are interested in them in the same manner that the incidental difficulties of other pursuits are encountered by other classes of citizens. Such aid has not been deemed necessary in other countries. Throughout Europe the domestic as well as the foreign exchanges are carried on by private houses often if not generally without the assistance of banks; yet they extend throughout distinct sovereignties and far exceed in amount the real exchanges of the United States. There is no reason why our own may not be conducted in the same manner with equal cheapness and safety. Certainly this might be accomplished if it were favored by those most deeply interested; and few can doubt that their own interest as well as the general welfare of the country would be promoted by leaving such a subject in the hands of those to whom it properly belongs. A system founded on private interest enterprise and competition without the aid of legislative grants or regulations by law would rapidly prosper; it would be free from the influence of political agitation and extend the same exemption to trade itself and it would put an end to those complaints of neglect partiality injustice and oppression which are the unavoidable results of interference by the Government in the proper concerns of individuals. All former attempts on the part of the Government to carry its legislation in this respect further than was designed by the Constitution have in the end proved injurious and have served only to convince the great body of the people more and more of the certain dangers of blending private interests with the operations of public business; and there is no reason to suppose that a repetition of them now would be more successful. It can not be concealed that there exists in our community opinions and feelings on this subject in direct opposition to each other. A large portion of them combining great intelligence activity and influence are no doubt sincere in their belief that the operations of trade ought to be assisted by such a connection; they regard a national bank as necessary for this purpose and they are disinclined to every measure that does not tend sooner or later to the establishment of such an institution. On the other hand a majority of the people are believed to be irreconcilably opposed to that measure; they consider such a concentration of power dangerous to their liberties and many of them regard it as a violation of the Constitution. This collision of opinion has doubtless caused much of the embarrassment to which the commercial transactions of the country have lately been exposed. Banking has become a political topic of the highest interest and trade has suffered in the conflict of parties. A speedy termination of this state of things however desirable is scarcely to be expected. We have seen for nearly half a century that those who advocate a national bank by whatever motive they may be influenced constitute a portion of our community too numerous to allow us to hope for an early abandonment of their favorite plan. On the other hand they must indeed form an erroneous estimate of the intelligence and temper of the American people who suppose that they have continued on slight or insufficient grounds their persevering opposition to such an institution or that they can be induced by pecuniary pressure or by any other combination of circumstances to surrender principles they have so long and so inflexibly maintained My own views of the subject are unchanged. They have been repeatedly and unreservedly announced to my fellow-citizens who with full knowledge of them conferred upon me the two highest offices of the Government. On the last of these occasions I felt it due to the people to apprise them distinctly that in the event of my election I would not be able to cooperate in the reestablishment of a national bank. To these sentiments I have now only to add the expression of an increased conviction that the reestablishment of such a bank in any form whilst it would not accomplish the beneficial purpose promised by its advocates would impair the rightful supremacy of the popular will injure the character and diminish the influence of our political system and bring once more into existence a concentrated moneyed power hostile to the spirit and threatening the permanency of our republican institutions. Local banks have been employed for the deposit and distribution of the revenue at all times partially and on three different occasions exclusively: First anterior to the establishment of the first Bank of the United States; secondly in the interval between the termination of that institution and the charter of its successor; and thirdly during the limited period which has now so abruptly closed. The connection thus repeatedly attempted proved unsatisfactory on each successive occasion notwithstanding the various measures which were adopted to facilitate or insure its success. On the last occasion in the year 1833 the employment of the State banks was guarded especially in every way which experience and caution could suggest. Personal security was required for the safe-keeping and prompt payment of the moneys to be received and full returns of their condition were from time to time to be made by the depositories. In the first stages the measure was eminently successful notwithstanding the violent opposition of the Bank of the United States and the unceasing efforts made to overthrow it. The selected banks performed with fidelity and without any embarrassment to themselves or to the community their engagements to the Government and the system promised to be permanently useful; but when it became necessary under the act of June 1836 to withdraw from them the public money for the purpose of placing it in additional institutions or of transferring it to the States they found it in many cases inconvenient to comply with the demands of the Treasury and numerous and pressing applications were made for indulgence or relief. As the installments under the deposit law became payable their own embarrassments and the necessity under which they lay of curtailing their discounts and calling in their debts increased the general distress and contributed with other causes to hasten the revulsion in which at length they in common with the other banks were fatally involved. Under these circumstances it becomes our solemn duty to inquire whether there are not in any connection between the Government and banks of issue evils of great magnitude inherent in its very nature and against which no precautions can effectually guard. Unforeseen in the organization of the Government and forced on the Treasury by early necessities the practice of employing banks was in truth from the beginning more a measure of emergency than of sound policy. When we started into existence as a nation in addition to the burdens of the new Government we assumed all the large but honorable load of debt which was the price of our liberty; but we hesitated to weigh down the infant industry of the country by resorting to adequate taxation for the necessary revenue. The facilities of banks in return for the privileges they acquired were promptly offered and perhaps too readily received by an embarrassed Treasury. During the long continuance of a national debt and the intervening difficulties of a foreign war the connection was continued from motives of convenience; but these causes have long since passed away. We have no emergencies that make banks necessary to aid the wants of the Treasury; we have no load of national debt to provide for and we have on actual deposit a large surplus. No public interest therefore now requires the renewal of a connection that circumstances have dissolved. The complete organization of our Government the abundance of our resources the general harmony which prevails between the different States and with foreign powers all enable us now to select the system most consistent with the Constitution and most conducive to the public welfare. Should we then connect the Treasury for a fourth time with the local banks it can only be under a conviction that past failures have arisen from accidental not inherent defects. A danger difficult if not impossible to be avoided in such an arrangement is made strikingly evident in the very event by which it has now been defeated. A sudden act of the banks intrusted with the funds of the people deprives the Treasury without fault or agency of the Government of the ability to pay its creditors in the currency they have by law a right to demand. This circumstance no fluctuation of commerce could have produced if the public revenue had been collected in the legal currency and kept in that form by the officers of the Treasury. The citizen whose money was in bank receives it back since the suspension at a sacrifice in its amount whilst he who kept it in the legal currency of the country and in his own possession pursues without loss the current of his business. The Government placed in the situation of the former is involved in embarrassments it could not have suffered had it pursued the course of the latter. These embarrassments are moreover augmented by those salutary and just laws which forbid it to use a depreciated currency and by so doing take from the Government the ability which individuals have of accommodating their transactions to such a catastrophe. A system which can in a time of profound peace when there is a large revenue laid by thus suddenly prevent the application and the use of the money of the people in the manner and for the objects they have directed can not be wise; but who can think without painful reflection that under it the same unforeseen events might have befallen us in the midst of a war and taken from us at the moment when most wanted the use of those very means which were treasured up to promote the national welfare and guard our national rights? To such embarrassments and to such dangers will this Government be always exposed whilst it takes the moneys raised for and necessary to the public service out of the hands of its own officers and converts them into a mere right of action against corporations intrusted with the possession of them. Nor can such results be effectually guarded against in such a system without investing the Executive with a control over the banks themselves whether State or national that might with reason be objected to. Ours is probably the only Government in the world that is liable in the management of its fiscal concerns to occurrences like these. But this imminent risk is not the only danger attendant on the surrender of the public money to the custody and control of local corporations. Though the object is aid to the Treasury its effect may be to introduce into the operations of the Government influences the most subtle founded on interests the most selfish. The use by the banks for their own benefit of the money deposited with them has received the sanction of the Government from the commencement of this connection. The money received from the people instead of being kept till it is needed for their use is in consequence of this authority a fund on which discounts are made for the profit of those who happen to be owners of stock in the banks selected as depositories. The supposed and often exaggerated advantages of such a boon will always cause it to be sought for with avidity. I will not stop to consider on whom the patronage incident to it is to be conferred. Whether the selection and control be trusted to Congress or to the Executive either will be subjected to appeals made in every form which the sagacity of interest can suggest. The banks under such a system are stimulated to make the most of their fortunate acquisition; the deposits are treated as an increase of capital; loans and circulation are rashly augmented and when the public exigencies require a return it is attended with embarrassments not provided for nor foreseen. Thus banks that thought themselves most fortunate when the public funds were received find themselves most embarrassed when the season of payment suddenly arrives. Unfortunately too the evils of the system are not limited to the banks. It stimulates a general rashness of enterprise and aggravates the fluctuations of commerce and the currency. This result was strikingly exhibited during the operations of the late deposit system and especially in the purchases of public lands. The order which ultimately directed the payment of gold and silver in such purchases greatly checked but could not altogether prevent the evil. Specie was indeed more difficult to be procured than the notes which the banks could themselves create at pleasure; but still being obtained from them as a loan and returned as a deposit which they were again at liberty to use it only passed round the circle with diminished speed. This operation could not have been performed had the funds of the Government gone into the Treasury to be regularly disbursed and not into banks to be loaned out for their own profit while they were permitted to substitute for it a credit in account. In expressing these sentiments I desire not to undervalue the benefits of a salutary credit to any branch of enterprise. The credit bestowed on probity and industry is the just reward of merit and an honorable incentive to further acquisition. None oppose it who love their country and understand its welfare. But when it is unduly encouraged; when it is made to inflame the public mind with the temptations of sudden and unsubstantial wealth; when it turns industry into paths that lead sooner or later to disappointment and distress it becomes liable to censure and needs correction. Far from helping probity and industry the ruin to which it leads falls most severely on the great laboring classes who are thrown suddenly out of employment and by the failure of magnificent s
