Fellow citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives: Our devout gratitude is due to the Supreme Being for having graciously continued to our beloved country through the vicissitudes of another year the invaluable blessings of health plenty and peace. Seldom has this favored land been so generally exempted from the ravages of disease or the labor of the husbandman more amply rewarded and never before have our relations with other countries been placed on a more favorable basis than that which they so happily occupy at this critical conjuncture in the affairs of the world. A rigid and persevering abstinence from all interference with the domestic and political relations of other states alike due to the genius and distinctive character of our government and to the principles by which it is directed; a faithful observance in the management of our foreign relations of the practice of speaking plainly dealing justly and requiring truth and justice in return as the best conservatives of the peace of nations; a strict impartiality in our manifestations of friendship in the commercial privileges we concede and those we require from others듮hese accompanied by a disposition as prompt to maintain in every emergency our own rights as we are from principle averse to the invasion of those of others have given to our country and government a standing in the great family of nations of which we have just cause to be proud and the advantages of which are experienced by our citizens throughout every portion of the earth to which their enterprising and adventurous spirit may carry them. Few if any remain insensible to the value of our friendship or ignorant of the terms on which it can be acquired and by which it can alone be preserved. A series of questions of long standing difficult in their adjustment and important in their consequences in which the rights of our citizens and the honor of the country were deeply involved have in the course of a few years (the most of them during the successful Administration of my immediate predecessor) been brought to a satisfactory conclusion; and the most important of those remaining are I am happy to believe in a fair way of being speedily and satisfactorily adjusted. With all the powers of the world our relations are those of honorable peace. Since your adjournment nothing serious has occurred to interrupt or threaten this desirable harmony. If clouds have lowered above the other hemisphere they have not cast their portentous shadows upon our happy shores. Bound by no entangling alliances yet linked by a common nature and interest with the other nations of mankind our aspirations are for the preservation of peace in whose solid and civilizing triumphs all may participate with a generous emulation. Yet it behooves us to be prepared for any event and to be always ready to maintain those just and enlightened principles of national intercourse for which this government has ever contended. In the shock of contending empires it is only by assuming a resolute bearing and clothing themselves with defensive armor that neutral nations can maintain their independent rights. The excitement which grew out of the territorial controversy between the United States and Great Britain having in a great measure subsided it is hoped that a favorable period is approaching for its final settlement. Both governments must now be convinced of the dangers with which the question is fraught and it must be their desire as it is their interest that this perpetual cause of irritation should be removed as speedily as practicable. In my last annual message you were informed that the proposition for a commission of exploration and survey promised by Great Britain had been received and that a counter project including also a provision for the certain and final adjustment of the limits in dispute was then before the British government for its consideration. The answer of that government accompanied by additional propositions of its own was received through its minister here since your separation. These were promptly considered such as were deemed correct in principle and consistent with a due regard to the just rights of the United States and of the state of Maine concurred in and the reasons for dissenting from the residue with an additional suggestion on our part communicated by the Secretary of State to Mr. Fox. That minister not feeling himself sufficiently instructed upon some of the points raised in the discussion felt it to be his duty to refer the matter to his own government for its further decision. Having now been for some time under its advisement a speedy answer may be confidently expected. From the character of the points still in difference and the undoubted disposition of both parties to bring the matter to an early conclusion I look with entire confidence to a prompt and satisfactory termination of the negotiation. Three commissioners were appointed shortly after the adjournment of Congress under the act of the last session providing for the exploration and survey of the line which separates the states of Maine and New Hampshire from the British Provinces. They have been actively employed until their progress was interrupted by the inclemency of the season and will resume their labors as soon as practicable in the ensuing year. It is understood that their respective examinations will throw new light upon the subject in controversy and serve to remove any erroneous impressions which may have been made elsewhere prejudicial to the rights of the United States. It was among other reasons with a view of preventing the embarrassments which in our peculiar system of government impede and complicate negotiations involving the territorial rights of a state that I thought it my duty as you have been informed on a previous occasion to propose to the British government through its minister at Washington that early steps should be taken to adjust the points of difference on the line of boundary from the entrance of Lake Superior to the most northwestern point of the Lake of the Woods by the arbitration of a friendly power in conformity with the seventh article of the Treaty of Ghent. No answer has yet been returned by the British government to this proposition. With Austria France Prussia Russia and the remaining powers of Europe I am happy to inform you our relations continue to be of the most friendly character. With Belgium a treaty of commerce and navigation based upon liberal principles of reciprocity and equality was concluded in March last and having been ratified by the Belgian government will be duly laid before the Senate. It is a subject of congratulation that it provides for the satisfactory adjustment of a long-standing question of controversy thus removing the only obstacle which could obstruct the friendly and mutually advantageous intercourse between the two nations. A messenger has been dispatched with the Hanoverian treaty to Berlin where according to stipulation the ratifications are to be exchanged. I am happy to announce to you that after many delays and difficulties a treaty of commerce and navigation between the United States and Portugal was concluded and signed at Lisbon on the 26th of August last by the plenipotentiaries of the two governments. Its stipulations are founded upon those principles of mutual liberality and advantage which the United States have always sought to make the basis of their intercourse with foreign powers and it is hoped they will tend to foster and strengthen the commercial intercourse of the two countries. Under the appropriation of the last session of Congress an agent has been sent to Germany for the purpose of promoting the interests of our tobacco trade. The commissioners appointed under the convention for the adjustment of claims of citizens of the United States upon Mexico having met and organized at Washington in August last the papers in the possession of the government relating to those claims were communicated to the board. The claims not embraced by that convention are now the subject of negotiation between the two governments through the medium of our minister at Mexico. Nothing has occurred to disturb the harmony of our relations with the different governments of South America. I regret however to be obliged to inform you that the claims of our citizens upon the late Republic of Colombia have not yet been satisfied by the separate governments into which it has been resolved. The charge' d'affaires of Brazil having expressed the intention of his government not to prolong the treaty of 1828 it will cease to be obligatory upon either party on the 12th day of December 1841 when the extensive commercial intercourse between the United States and that vast Empire will no longer be regulated by express stipulations. It affords me pleasure to communicate to you that the government of Chile has entered into an agreement to indemnify the claimants in the case of the Macectonian for American property seized in 1819 and to add that information has also been received which justifies the hope of an early adjustment of the remaining claims upon that government. The commissioners appointed in pursuance of the convention between the United States and Texas for marking the boundary between them have according to the last report received from our commissioner surveyed and established the whole extent of the boundary north along the western bank of the Sabine River from its entrance into the Gulf of Mexico to the 32nd degree of north latitude. The commission adjourned on the 16th of June last to reassemble on the 1st of November for the purpose of establishing accurately the intersection of the 32nd degree of latitude with the western bank of the Sabine and the meridian line thence to Red River. It is presumed that the work will be concluded in the present season. The present sound condition of their finances and the success with which embarrassments in regard to them at times apparently insurmountable have been overcome are matters upon which the people and government of the United States may well congratulate themselves. An overflowing Treasury however it may be regarded as an evidence of public prosperity is seldom conducive to the permanent welfare of any people and experience has demonstrated its incompatibility with the salutary action of political institutions like those of the United States. Our safest reliance for financial efficiency and independence has on the contrary been found to consist in ample resources unencumbered with debt and in this respect the federal government occupies a singularly fortunate and truly enviable position. When I entered upon the discharge of my official duties in March 1837 the act for the distribution of the surplus revenue was in a course of rapid execution. Nearly $28000000 of the public moneys were in pursuance of its provisions deposited with the states in the months of January April and July of that year. In May there occurred a general suspension of specie payments by the banks including with very few exceptions those in which the public moneys were deposited and upon whose fidelity the government had unfortunately made itself dependent for the revenues which had been collected from the people and were indispensable to the public service. This suspension and the excesses in banking and commerce out of which it arose and which were greatly aggravated by its occurrence made to a great extent unavailable the principal part of the public money then on hand suspended the collection of many millions accruing on merchants' bonds and greatly reduced the revenue arising from customs and the public lands. These effects have continued to operate in various degrees to the present period and in addition to the decrease in the revenue thus produced two and a half millions of duties have been relinquished by two biennial reductions under the act of 1833 and probably as much more upon the importation of iron for railroads by special legislation. Whilst such has been our condition for the last four years in relation to revenue we have during the same period been subjected to an unavoidable continuance of large extraordinary expenses necessarily growing out of past transactions and which could not be immediately arrested without great prejudice to the public interest. Of these the charge upon the Treasurer in consequence of the Cherokee treaty alone without adverting to others arising out of Indian treaties has already exceeded $5000000; that for the prosecution of measures for the removal of the Seminole Indians which were found in progress has been nearly 14 millions and the public buildings have required the unusual sum of nearly three millions. It affords me however great pleasure to be able to say that from the commencement of this period to the present day every demand upon the government at home or abroad has been promptly met. This has been done not only without creating a permanent debt or a resort to additional taxation in any form but in the midst of a steadily progressive reduction of existing burdens upon the people leaving still a considerable balance of available funds which will remain in the Treasury at the end of the year. The small amount of Treasury notes not exceeding $4500000 still outstanding and less by 23 millions than the United States have in deposit with the states is composed of such only as are not yet due or have not been presented for payment. They may be redeemed out of the accruing revenue if the expenditures do not exceed the amount within which they may it is thought be kept without prejudice to the public interest and the revenue shall prove to be as large as may justly be anticipated. Among the reflections arising from the contemplation of these circumstances one not the least gratifying is the consciousness that the government had the resolution and the ability to adhere in every emergency to the sacred obligations of law to execute all its contracts according to the requirements of the Constitution and thus to present when most needed a rallying point by which the business of the whole country might be brought back to a safe and unvarying standard드 result vitally important as well to the interests as to the morals of the people. There can surely now be no difference of opinion in regard to the incalculable evils that would have arisen if the government at that critical moment had suffered itself to be deterred from upholding the only true standard of value either by the pressure of adverse circumstances or the violence of unmerited denunciation. The manner in which the people sustained the performance of this duty was highly honorable to their fortitude and patriotism. It can not fail to stimulate their agents to adhere under all circumstances to the line of duty and to satisfy them of the safety with which a course really right and demanded by a financial crisis may in a community like ours be pursued however apparently severe its immediate operation. The policy of the federal government in extinguishing as rapidly as possible the national debt and subsequently in resisting every temptation to create a new one deserves to be regarded in the same favorable light. Among the many objections to a national debt the certain tendency of public securities to concentrate ultimately in the coffers of foreign stockholders is one which is every day gathering strength. Already have the resources of many of the states and the future industry of their citizens been indefinitely mortgaged to the subjects of European governments to the amount of 12 millions annually to pay the constantly accruing interest on borrowed money드 sum exceeding half the ordinary revenues of the whole United States. The pretext which this relation affords to foreigners to scrutinize the management of our domestic affairs if not actually to intermeddle with them presents a subject for earnest attention not to say of serious alarm. Fortunately the federal government with the exception of an obligation entered into in behalf of the District of Columbia which must soon be discharged is wholly exempt from any such embarrassment. It is also as is believed the only government which having fully and faithfully paid all its creditors has also relieved itself entirely from debt. To maintain a distinction so desirable and so honorable to our national character should be an object of earnest solicitude. Never should a free people if it be possible to avoid it expose themselves to the necessity of having to treat of the peace the honor or the safety of the Republic with the governments of foreign creditors who however well disposed they may be to cultivate with us in general friendly relations are nevertheless by the law of their own condition made hostile to the success and permanency of political institutions like ours. Most humiliating may be the embarrassments consequent upon such a condition. Another objection scarcely less formidable to the commencement of a new debt is its inevitable tendency to increase in magnitude and to foster national extravagance. He has been an unprofitable observer of events who needs at this day to be admonished of the difficulties which a government habitually dependent on loans to sustain its ordinary expenditures has to encounter in resisting the influences constantly exerted in favor of additional loans; by capitalists who enrich themselves by government securities for amounts much exceeding the money they actually advance드 prolific source of individual aggrandizement in all borrowing countries; by stockholders who seek their gains in the rise and fall of public stocks; and by the selfish importunities of applicants for appropriations for works avowedly for the accommodation of the public but the real objects of which are too frequently the advancement of private interests. The known necessity which so many of the states will be under to impose taxes for the payment of the interest on their debts furnishes an additional and very cogent reason why the federal governments should refrain from creating a national debt by which the people would be exposed to double taxation for a similar object. We possess within ourselves ample resources for every emergency and we may be quite sure that our citizens in no future exigency will be unwilling to supply the government with all the means asked for the defense of the country. In time of peace there can at all events be no justification for the creation of a permanent debt by the federal government. Its limited range of constitutional duties may certainly under such circumstances be performed without such a resort. It has it is seen been avoided during four years of greater fiscal difficulties than have existed in a similar period since the adoption of the Constitution and one also remarkable for the occurrence of extraordinary causes of expenditures. But to accomplish so desirable an object two things are indispensable: First that the action of the federal government be kept within the boundaries prescribed by its founders and secondly that all appropriations for objects admitted to be constitutional and the expenditure of them also be subjected to a standard of rigid but well-considered and practical economy. The first depends chiefly on the people themselves듮he opinions they form of the true construction of the Constitution and the confidence they repose in the political sentiments of those they select as their representatives in the federal legislature; the second rests upon the fidelity with which their more immediate representatives and other public functionaries discharge the trusts committed to them. The duty of economizing the expenses of the public service is admitted on all hands; yet there are few subjects upon which there exists a wider difference of opinion than is constantly manifested in regard to the fidelity with which that duty is discharged. Neither diversity of sentiment nor even mutual recriminations upon a point in respect to which the public mind is so justly sensitive can well be entirely avoided and least so at periods of great political excitement. An intelligent people however seldom fail to arrive in the end at correct conclusions in such a matter. Practical economy in the management of public affairs can have no adverse influence to contend with more powerful than a large surplus revenue and the unusually large appropriations for 1837 may without doubt independently of the extraordinary requisitions for the public service growing out of the state of our Indian relations be in no inconsiderable degree traced to this source. The sudden and rapid distribution of the large surplus then in the Treasury and the equally sudden and unprecedentedly severe revulsion in the commerce and business of the country pointing with unerring certainty to a great and protracted reduction of the revenue strengthened the propriety of the earliest practicable reduction of the public expenditures. But to change a system operating upon so large a surface and applicable to such numerous and diversified interests and objects was more than the work of a day. The attention of every department of the government was immediately and in good faith directed to that end and has been so continued to the present moment. The estimates and appropriations for the year 1838 (the first over which I had any control) were somewhat diminished. The expenditures of 1839 were reduced $6000000. Those of 1840 exclusive of disbursements for public debt and trust claims will probably not exceed 22 1/2 millions being between two and three millions less than those of the preceding year and nine or 10 millions less than those of 1837. Nor has it been found necessary in order to produce this result to resort to the power conferred by Congress of postponing certain classes of the public works except by deferring expenditures for a short period upon a limited portion of them and which postponement terminated some time since드t the moment the Treasury Department by further receipts from the indebted banks became fully assured of its ability to meet them without prejudice to the public service in other respects. Causes are in operation which will it is believed justify a still further reduction without injury to any important national interest. The expenses of sustaining the troops employed in Florida have been gradually and greatly reduced through the persevering efforts of the War Department and a reasonable hope may be entertained that the necessity for military operations in that quarter will soon cease. The removal of the Indians from within our settled borders is nearly completed. The pension list one of the heaviest charges upon the Treasury is rapidly diminishing by death. The most costly of our public buildings are either finished or nearly so and we may I think safely promise ourselves a continued exemption from border difficulties. The available balance in the Treasury on the 1st of January next is estimated at $1500000. This sum with the expected receipts from all sources during the next year will it is believed be sufficient to enable the government to meet every engagement and have a suitable balance in the Treasury at the end of the year if the remedial measures connected with the customs and the public lands heretofore recommended are adopted and the new appropriations by Congress shall not carry the expenditures beyond the official estimates. The new system established by Congress for the safe-keeping of the public money prescribing the kind of currency to be received for the public revenue and providing additional guards and securities against losses has now been several mouths in operation. Although it might be premature upon an experience of such limited duration to form a definite opinion in regard to the extent of its influences in correcting many evils under which the federal government and the country have hitherto suffered especially those that have grown out of banking expansions a depreciated currency and official defalcations yet it is but right to say that nothing has occurred in the practical operation of the system to weaken in the slightest degree but much to strengthen the confident anticipations of its friends. The grounds of these have been heretofore so fully explained as to require no recapitulation. In respect to the facility and convenience it affords in conducting the public service and the ability of the government to discharge through its agency every duty attendant on the collection transfer and disbursement of the public money with promptitude and success I can say with confidence tha the apprehensions of those who felt it to be their duty to oppose its adoption have proved to be unfounded. On the contrary this branch of the fiscal affairs of the government has been and it is believed may always be thus carried on with every desirable facility and security. A few changes and improvements in the details of the system without affecting any principles involved in it will be submitted to you by the Secretary of the Treasury and will I am sure receive at your hands that attention to which they may on examination be found to be entitled. I have deemed this brief summary of our fiscal affairs necessary to the due performance of a duty specially enjoined upon me by the Constitution. It will serve also to illustrate more fully the principles by which I have been guided in reference to two contested points in our public policy which were earliest in their development and have been more important in their consequences than any that have arisen under our complicated and difficult yet admirable system of government. I allude to a national debt and a national bank. It was in these that the political contests by which the country has been agitated ever since the adoption of the Constitution in a great measure originated and there is too much reason to apprehend that the conflicting interests and opposing principles thus marshaled will continue as heretofore to produce similar if not aggravated consequences. Coming into office the declared enemy of both I have earnestly endeavored to prevent a resort to either. The consideration that a large public debt affords an apology and produces in some degree a necessity also for resorting to a system and extent of taxation which is not only oppressive throughout but is likewise so apt to lead in the end to the commission of that most odious of all offenses against the principles of republican government the prostitution of political power conferred for the general benefit to the aggrandizement of particular classes and the gratification of individual cupidity is alone sufficient independently of the weighty objections which have already been urged to render its creation and existence the sources of bitter and unappeasable discord. If we add to this its inevitable tendency to produce and foster extravagant expenditures of the public moneys by which a necessity is created for new loans and new burdens on the people and finally refer to the examples of every government which has existed for proof how seldom it is that the system when once adopted and implanted in the policy of a country has failed to expand itself until public credit was exhausted and the people were no longer able to endure its increasing weight it seems impossible to resist the conclusion that no benefits resulting from its career no extent of conquest no accession of wealth to particular classes nor any nor all its combined advantages can counterbalance its ultimate but certain results드 splendid government and an impoverished people. If a national bank was as is undeniable repudiated by the framers of the Constitution as incompatible with the rights of the states and the liberties of the people; if from the beginning it has been regarded by large portions of our citizens as coming in direct collision with that great and vital amendment of the Constitution which declares that all powers not conferred by that instrument on the general government are reserved to the states and to the people; if it has been viewed by them as the first great step in the march of latitudinous construction which unchecked would render that sacred instrument of as little value as an unwritten constitution dependent as it would alone be for its meaning on the interested interpretation of a dominant party and affording no security to the rights of the minority들f such is undeniably the case what rational grounds could have been conceived for anticipating aught but determined opposition to such an institution at the present day. Could a different result have been expected when the consequences which have flowed from its creation and particularly from its struggles to perpetuate its existence had confirmed in so striking a manner the apprehensions of its earliest opponents; when it had been so clearly demonstrated that a concentrated money power wielding so vast a capital and combining such incalculable means of influence may in those peculiar conjunctures to which this government is unavoidably exposed prove an overmatch for the political power of the people themselves; when the true character of its capacity to regulate according to its will and its interests and the interests of its favorites the value and production of the labor and property of every man in this extended country had been so fully and fearfully developed; when it was notorious that all classes of this great community had by means of the power and influence it thus possesses been infected to madness with a spirit of heedless speculation; when it had been seen that secure in the support of the combination of influences by which it was surrounded it could violate its charter and set the laws at defiance with impunity; and when too it had become most apparent that to believe that such an accumulation of powers can ever be granted without the certainty of being abused was to indulge in a fatal delusion? To avoid the necessity of a permanent debt and its inevitable consequences I have advocated and endeavored to carry into effect the policy of confining the appropriations for the public service to such objects only as are clearly within the constitutional authority of the federal government; of excluding from its expenses those improvident and unauthorized grants of public money for works of internal improvement which were so wisely arrested by the constitutional interposition of my predecessor and which if they had not been so checked would long before this time have involved the finances of the general government in embarrassments far greater than those which are now experienced by any of the states; of limiting all our expenditures to that simple unostentatious and economical administration of public affairs which is alone consistent with the character of our institutions; of collecting annually from the customs and the sales of public lands a revenue fully adequate to defray all the expenses thus incurred; but under no pretense whatsoever to impose taxes upon the people to a greater amount than was actually necessary to the public service conducted upon the principles I have stated. In lieu of a national bank or a dependence upon banks of any description for the management of our fiscal affairs I recommended the adoption of the system which is now in successful operation. That system affords every requisite facility for the transaction of the pecuniary concerns of the government; will it is confidently anticipated produce in other respects many of the benefits which have been from time to time expected from the creation of a national bank but which have never been realized; avoid the manifold evils inseparable from such an institution; diminish to a greater extent than could be accomplished by any other measure of reform the patronage of the federal government드 wise policy in all governments but more especially so in one like ours which works well only in proportion as it is made to rely for its support upon the unbiased and unadulterated opinions of its constituents; do away forever all dependence on corporate bodies either in the raising collecting safekeeping or disbursing the public revenues and place the government equally above the temptation of fostering a dangerous and unconstitutional institution at home or the necessity of adapting its policy to the views and interests of a still more formidable money power abroad. It is by adopting and carrying out these principles under circumstances the most arduous and discouraging that the attempt has been made thus far successfully to demonstrate to the people of the United States that a natio
