To the Senate and House of Representatives: A year of peace and general prosperity to this nation has passed since the last assembling of Congress. We have through a kind Providence been blessed with abundant crops and have been spared from complications and war with foreign nations. In our midst comparative harmony has been restored. It is to be regretted however that a free exercise of the elective franchise has by violence and intimidation been denied to citizens in exceptional cases in several of the States lately in rebellion and the verdict of the people has thereby been reversed. The States of Virginia Mississippi and Texas have been restored to representation in our national councils. Georgia the only State now without representation may confidently be expected to take her place there also at the beginning of the new year and then let us hope will be completed the work of reconstruction. With an acquiescence on the part of the whole people in the national obligation to pay the public debt created as the price of our Union the pensions to our disabled soldiers and sailors and their widows and orphans and in the changes to the Constitution which have been made necessary by a great rebellion there is no reason why we should not advance in material prosperity and happiness as no other nation ever did after so protracted and devastating a war. Soon after the existing war broke out in Europe the protection of the United States minister in Paris was invoked in favor of North Germans domiciled in French territory. Instructions were issued to grant the protection. This has been followed by an extension of American protection to citizens of Saxony Hesse and Saxe-Coburg Gotha Colombia Portugal Uruguay the Dominican Republic Ecuador Chile Paraguay and Venezuela in Paris. The charge was an onerous one requiring constant and severe labor as well as the exercise of patience prudence and good judgment. It has been performed to the entire satisfaction of this Government and as I am officially informed equally so to the satisfaction of the Government of North Germany. As soon as I learned that a republic had been proclaimed at Paris and that the people of France had acquiesced in the change the minister of the United States was directed by telegraph to recognize it and to tender my congratulations and those of the people of the United States. The reestablishment in France of a system of government disconnected with the dynastic traditions of Europe appeared to be a proper subject for the felicitations of Americans. Should the present struggle result in attaching the hearts of the French to our simpler forms of representative government it will be a subject of still further satisfaction to our people. While we make no effort to impose our institutions upon the inhabitants of other countries and while we adhere to our traditional neutrality in civil contests elsewhere we can not be indifferent to the spread of American political ideas in a great and highly civilized country like France. We were asked by the new Government to use our good offices jointly with those of European powers in the interests of peace. Answer was made that the established policy and the true interests of the United States forbade them to interfere in European questions jointly with European powers. I ascertained informally and unofficially that the Government of North Germany was not then disposed to listen to such representations from any power and though earnestly wishing to see the blessings of peace restored to the belligerents with all of whom the United States are on terms of friendship I declined on the part of this Government to take a step which could only result in injury to our true interests without advancing the object for which our intervention was invoked. Should the time come when the action of the United States can hasten the return of peace by a single hour that action will be heartily taken. I deemed it prudent in view of the number of persons of German and French birth living in the United States to issue soon after official notice of a state of war had been received from both belligerents a proclamation defining the duties of the United States as a neutral and the obligations of persons residing within their territory to observe their laws and the laws of nations. This proclamation was followed by others as circumstances seemed to call for them. The people thus acquainted in advance of their duties and obligations have assisted in preventing violations of the neutrality of the United States. It is not understood that the condition of the insurrection in Cuba has materially changed since the close of the last session of Congress. In an early stage of the contest the authorities of Spain inaugurated a system of arbitrary arrests of close confinement and of military trial and execution of persons suspected of complicity with the insurgents and of summary embargo of their properties and sequestration of their revenues by executive warrant. Such proceedings so far as they affected the persons or property of citizens of the United States were in violation of the provisions of the treaty of 1795 between the United States and Spain. Representations of injuries resulting to several persons claiming to be citizens of the United States by reason of such violations were made to the Spanish Government. From April 1869 to June last the Spanish minister at Washington had been clothed with a limited power to aid in redressing such wrongs. That power was found to be withdrawn "in view" as it was said "of the favorable situation in which the island of Cuba" then "was" which however did not lead to a revocation or suspension of the extraordinary and arbitrary functions exercised by the executive power in Cuba and we were obliged to make our complaints at Madrid. In the negotiations thus opened and still pending there the United States only claimed that for the future the rights secured to their citizens by treaty should be respected in Cuba and that as to the past a joint tribunal should be established in the United States with full jurisdiction over all such claims. Before such an impartial tribunal each claimant would be required to prove his case. On the other hand Spain would be at liberty to traverse every material fact and thus complete equity would be done. A case which at one time threatened seriously to affect the relations between the United States and Spain has already been disposed of in this way. The claim of the owners of the Colonel Lloyd Aspinwall for the illegal seizure and detention of that vessel was referred to arbitration by mutual consent and has resulted in an award to the United States for the owners of the sum of $19702.50 in gold. Another and long-pending claim of like nature that of the whaleship Canada has been disposed of by friendly arbitrament during the present year. It was referred by the joint consent of Brazil and the United States to the decision of Sir Edward Thornton Her Britannic Majesty's minister at Washington who kindly undertook the laborious task of examining the voluminous mass of correspondence and testimony submitted by the two Governments and awarded to the United States the sum of $100740.09 in gold which has since been paid by the Imperial Government. These recent examples show that the mode which the United States have proposed to Spain for adjusting the pending claims is just and feasible and that it may be agreed to by either nation without dishonor. It is to be hoped that this moderate demand may be acceded to by Spain without further delay. Should the pending negotiations unfortunately and unexpectedly be without result it will then become my duty to communicate that fact to Congress and invite its action on the subject. The long-deferred peace conference between Spain and the allied South American Republics has been inaugurated in Washington under the auspices of the United States. Pursuant to the recommendation contained in the resolution of the House of Representatives of the 17th of December 1866 the executive department of the Government offered its friendly offices for the promotion of peace and harmony between Spain and the allied Republics. Hesitations and obstacles occurred to the acceptance of the offer. Ultimately however a conference was arranged and was opened in this city on the 29th of October last at which I authorized the Secretary of State to preside. It was attended by the ministers of Spain Peru Chile and Ecuador. In consequence of the absence of a representative from Bolivia the conference was adjourned until the attendance of a plenipotentiary from that Republic could be secured or other measures could be adopted toward compassing its objects. The allied and other Republics of Spanish origin on this continent may see in this fact a new proof of our sincere interest in their welfare of our desire to see them blessed with good governments capable of maintaining order and of preserving their respective territorial integrity and of our sincere wish to extend our own commercial and social relations with them. The time is not probably far distant when in the natural course of events the European political connection with this continent will cease. Our policy should be shaped in view of this probability so as to ally the commercial interests of the Spanish American States more closely to our own and thus give the United States all the preeminence and all the advantage which Mr. Monroe Mr. Adams and Mr. Clay contemplated when they proposed to join in the congress of Panama. During the last session of Congress a treaty for the annexation of the Republic of San Domingo to the United States failed to receive the requisite two-thirds vote of the Senate. I was thoroughly convinced then that the best interests of this country commercially and materially demanded its ratification. Time has only confirmed me in this view. I now firmly believe that the moment it is known that the United States have entirely abandoned the project of accepting as a part of its territory the island of San Domingo a free port will be negotiated for by European nations in the Bay of Samana. A large commercial city will spring up to which we will be tributary without receiving corresponding benefits and then will be seen the folly of our rejecting so great a prize. The Government of San Domingo has voluntarily sought this annexation. It is a weak power numbering probably less than 120000 souls and yet possessing one of the richest territories under the sun capable of supporting a population of 10000000 people in luxury. The people of San Domingo are not capable of maintaining themselves in their present condition and must look for outside support. They yearn for the protection of our free institutions and laws our progress and civilization. Shall we refuse them? The acquisition of San Domingo is desirable because of its geographical position. It commands the entrance to the Caribbean Sea and the Isthmus transit of commerce. It possesses the richest soil best and most capacious harbors most salubrious climate and the most valuable products of the forests mine and soil of any of the West India Islands. Its possession by us will in a few years build up a coastwise commerce of immense magnitude which will go far toward restoring to us our lost merchant marine. It will give to us those articles which we consume so largely and do not produce thus equalizing our exports and imports. In case of foreign war it will give us command of all the islands referred to and thus prevent an enemy from ever again possessing himself of rendezvous upon our very coast. At present our coast trade between the States bordering on the Atlantic and those bordering on the Gulf of Mexico is cut into by the Bahamas and the Antilies. Twice we must as it were pass through foreign countries to get by sea from Georgia to the west coast of Florida. San Domingo with a stable government under which her immense resources can be developed will give remunerative wages to tens of thousands of laborers not now upon the island. This labor will take advantage of every available means of transportation to abandon the adjacent islands and seek the blessings of freedom and its sequence--each inhabitant receiving the reward of his own labor. Porto Rico and Cuba will have to abolish slavery as a measure of self-preservation to retain their laborers. San Domingo will become a large consumer of the products of Northern farms and manufactories. The cheap rate at which her citizens can be furnished with food tools and machinery will make it necessary that contiguous islands should have the same advantages in order to compete in the production of sugar coffee tobacco tropical fruits etc. This will open to us a still wider market for our products. The production of our own supply of these articles will cut off more than one hundred millions of our annual imports besides largely increasing our exports. With such a picture it is easy to see how our large debt abroad is ultimately to be extinguished. With a balance of trade against us (including interest on bonds held by foreigners and money spent by our citizens traveling in foreign lands) equal to the entire yield of the precious metals in this country it is not so easy to see how this result is to be otherwise accomplished. The acquisition of San Domingo is an adherence to the "Monroe doctrine;" it is a measure of national protection; it is asserting our just claim to a controlling influence over the great commercial traffic soon to flow from west to east by way of the Isthmus of Darien; it is to build up our merchant marine; it is to furnish new markets for the products of our farms shops and manufactories; it is to make slavery insupportable in Cuba and Porto Rico at once and ultimately so in Brazil; it is to settle the unhappy condition of Cuba and end an exterminating conflict; it is to provide honest means of paying our honest debts without overtaxing the people; it is to furnish our citizens with the necessaries of everyday life at cheaper rates than ever before; and it is in fine a rapid stride toward that greatness which the intelligence industry and enterprise of the citizens of the United States entitle this country to assume among nations. In view of the importance of this question I earnestly urge upon Congress early action expressive of its views as to the best means of acquiring San Domingo. My suggestion is that by joint resolution of the two Houses of Congress the Executive be authorized to appoint a commission to negotiate a treaty with the authorities of San Domingo for the acquisition of that island and that an appropriation be made to defray the expenses of such a commission. The question may then be determined either by the action of the Senate upon the treaty or the joint action of the two Houses of Congress upon a resolution of annexation as in the case of the acquisition of Texas. So convinced am I of the advantages to flow from the acquisition of San Domingo and of the great disadvantages--I might almost say calamities--to flow from nonacquisition that I believe the subject has only to be investigated to be approved. It is to be regretted that our representations in regard to the injurious effects especially upon the revenue of the United States of the policy of the Mexican Government in exempting from impost duties a large tract of its territory on our borders have not only been fruitless but that it is even proposed in that country to extend the limits within which the privilege adverted to has hitherto been enjoyed. The expediency of taking into your serious consideration proper measures for countervailing the policy referred to will it is presumed engage your earnest attention. It is the obvious interest especially of neighboring nations to provide against impunity to those who may have committed high crimes within their borders and who may have sought refuge abroad. For this purpose extradition treaties have been concluded with several of the Central American Republics and others are in progress. The sense of Congress is desired as early as may be convenient upon the proceedings of the commission on claims against Venezuela as communicated in my messages of March 16 1869 March 1 1870 and March 31 1870. It has not been deemed advisable to distribute any of the money which has been received from that Government until Congress shall have acted on the subject. The massacres of French and Russian residents at Tien-Tsin under circumstances of great barbarity was supposed by some to have been premeditated and to indicate a purpose among the populace to exterminate foreigners in the Chinese Empire. The evidence fails to establish such a supposition but shows a complicity between the local authorities and the mob. The Government at Peking however seems to have been disposed to fulfill its treaty obligations so far as it was able to do so. Unfortunately the news of the war between the German States and France reached China soon after the massacre. It would appear that the popular mind became possessed with the idea that this contest extending to Chinese waters would neutralize the Christian influence and power and that the time was coming when the superstitious masses might expel all foreigners and restore mandarin influence. Anticipating trouble from this cause I invited France and North Germany to make an authorized suspension of hostilities in the East (where they were temporarily suspended by act of the commanders) and to act together for the future protection in China of the lives and properties of Americans and Europeans. Since the adjournment of Congress the ratifications of the treaty with Great Britain for abolishing the mixed courts for the suppression of the slave trade have been exchanged. It is believed that the slave trade is now confined to the eastern coast of Africa whence the slaves are taken to Arabian markets. The ratifications of the naturalization convention between Great Britain and the United States have also been exchanged during the recess and thus a long-standing dispute between the two Governments has been settled in accordance with the principles always contended for by the United States. In April last while engaged in locating a military reservation near Pembina a corps of engineers discovered that the commonly received boundary line between the United States and the British possessions at that place is about 4700 feet south of the true position of the forty-ninth parallel and that the line when run on what is now supposed to be the true position of that parallel would leave the fort of the Hudsons Bay Company at Pembina within the territory of the United States. This information being communicated to the British Government I was requested to consent and did consent that the British occupation of the fort of the Hudsons Bay Company should continue for the present. I deem it important however that this part of the boundary line should be definitely fixed by a joint commission of the two Governments and I submit herewith estimates of the expense of such a commission on the part of the United States and recommend that an appropriation be made for that purpose. The land boundary has already been fixed and marked from the summit of the Rocky Mountains to the Georgian Bay. It should now be in like manner marked from the Lake of the Woods to the summit of the Rocky Mountains. I regret to say that no conclusion has been reached for the adjustment of the claims against Great Britain growing out of the course adopted by that Government during the rebellion. The cabinet of London so far as its views have been expressed does not appear to be willing to concede that Her Majesty's Government was guilty of any negligence or did or permitted any act during the war by which the United States has just cause of complaint. Our firm and unalterable convictions are directly the reverse. I therefore recommend to Congress to authorize the appointment of a commission to take proof of the amount and the ownership of these several claims on notice to the representative of Her Majesty at Washington and that authority be given for the settlement of these claims by the United States so that the Government shall have the ownership of the private claims as well as the responsible control of all the demands against Great Britain. It can not be necessary to add that whenever Her Majesty's Government shall entertain a desire for a full and friendly adjustment of these claims the United States will enter upon their consideration with an earnest desire for a conclusion consistent with the honor and dignity of both nations. The course pursued by the Canadian authorities toward the fishermen of the United States during the past season has not been marked by a friendly feeling. By the first article of the convention of 1818 between Great Britain and the United States it was agreed that the inhabitants of the United States should have forever in common with British subjects the right of taking fish in certain waters therein defined. In the waters not included in the limits named in the convention (within 3 miles of parts of the British coast) it has been the custom for many years to give to intruding fishermen of the United States a reasonable warning of their violation of the technical rights of Great Britain. The Imperial Government is understood to have delegated the whole or a share of its jurisdiction or control of these inshore fishing grounds to the colonial authority known as the Dominion of Canada and this semi-independent but irresponsible agent has exercised its delegated powers in an unfriendly way. Vessels have been seized without notice or warning in violation of the custom previously prevailing and have been taken into the colonial ports their voyages broken up and the vessels condemned. There is reason to believe that this unfriendly and vexatious treatment was designed to bear harshly upon the hardy fishermen of the United States with a view to political effect upon this Government. The statutes of the Dominion of Canada assume a still broader and more untenable jurisdiction over the vessels of the United States. They authorize officers or persons to bring vessels hovering within 3 marine miles of any of the coasts bays creeks or harbors of Canada into port to search the cargo to examine the master on oath touching the cargo and voyage and to inflict upon him a heavy pecuniary penalty if true answers are not given; and if such a vessel is found "preparing to fish" within 3 marine miles of any of such coasts bays creeks or harbors without a license or after the expiration of the period named in the last license granted to it they provide that the vessel with her tackle etc. shall be forfeited. It is not known that any condemnations have been made under this statute. Should the authorities of Canada attempt to enforce it it will become my duty to take such steps as may be necessary to protect the rights of the citizens of the United States. It has been claimed by Her Majesty's officers that the fishing vessels of the United States have no right to enter the open ports of the British possessions in North America except for the purposes of shelter and repairing damages of purchasing wood and obtaining water; that they have no right to enter at the British custom-houses or to trade there except in the purchase of wood and water and that they must depart within twenty-four hours after notice to leave. It is not known that any seizure of a fishing vessel carrying the flag of the United States has been made under this claim. So far as the claim is founded on an alleged construction of he convention of 1818 it can not be acquiesced in by the United States. It is hoped that it will not be insisted on by Her Majesty's Government. During the conferences which preceded the negotiation of the convention of 1818 the British commissioners proposed to expressly exclude the fishermen of the United States from "the privilege of carrying on trade with any of His Britannic Majesty's subjects residing within the limits assigned for their use;" and also that it should not be "lawful for the vessels of the United States engaged in said fishery to have on board any goods wares or merchandise whatever except such as may be necessary for the prosecution of their voyages to and from the said fishing grounds: and any vessel of the United States which shall contravene this regulation may be seized condemned and confiscated with her cargo." This proposition which is identical with the construction now put upon the language of the convention was emphatically rejected by the American commissioners and thereupon was abandoned by the British plenipotentiaries and Article I as it stands in the convention was substituted. If however it be said that this claim is founded on provincial or colonial statutes and not upon the convention this Government can not but regard them as unfriendly and in contravention of the spirit if not of the letter of the treaty for the faithful execution of which the Imperial Government is alone responsible. Anticipating that an attempt may possibly be made by the Canadian authorities in the coming season to repeat their unneighborly acts toward our fishermen I recommend you to confer upon the Executive the power to suspend by proclamation the operation of the laws authorizing the transit of goods wares and merchandise in bond across the territory of the United States to Canada and further should such an extreme measure become necessary to suspend the operation of any laws whereby the vessels of the Dominion of Canada are permitted to enter the waters of the United States. A like unfriendly disposition has been manifested on the part of Canada in the maintenance of a claim of right to exclude the citizens of the United States from the navigation of the St. Lawrence. This river constitutes a natural outlet to the ocean for eight States with an aggregate population of about 17600000 inhabitants and with an aggregate tonnage of 661367 tons upon the waters which discharge into it. The foreign commerce of our ports on these waters is open to British competition and the major part of it is done in British bottoms. If the American seamen be excluded from this natural avenue to the ocean the monopoly of the direct commerce of the lake ports with the Atlantic would be in foreign hands their vessels on transatlantic voyages having an access to our lake ports which would be denied to American vessels on similar voyages. To state such a proposition is to refute its justice. During the Administration of Mr. John Quincy Adams Mr. Clay unanswerably demonstrated the natural right of the citizens of the United States to the navigation of this river claiming that the act of the congress of Vienna in opening the Rhine and other rivers to all nations showed the judgment of European jurists and statesmen that the inhabitants of a country through which a navigable river passes have a natural right to enjoy the navigation of that river to and into the sea even though passing through the territories of another power. This right does not exclude the coequal right of the sovereign possessing the territory through which the river debouches into the sea to make such regulations relative to the police of the navigation as may be reasonably necessary; but those regulations should be framed in a liberal spirit of comity and should not impose needless burdens upon the commerce which has the right of transit. It has been found in practice more advantageous to arrange these regulations by mutual agreement. The United States are ready to make any reasonable arrangement as to the police of the St. Lawrence which may be suggested by Great Britain. If the claim made by Mr. Clay was just when the population of States bordering on the shores of the Lakes was only 3400000 it now derives greater force and equity from the increased population wealth production and tonnage of the States on the Canadian frontier. Since Mr. Clay advanced his argument in behalf of our right the principle for which he contended has been frequently and by various nations recognized by law or by treaty and has been extended to several other great rivers. By the treaty concluded at Mayence in 1831 the Rhine was declared free from the point where it is first navigable into the sea. By the convention between Spain and Portugal concluded in 1835 the navigation of the Douro throughout its whole extent was made free for the subjects of both Crowns. In 1853 the Argentine Confederation by treaty threw open the free navigation of the Parana and the Uruguay to the merchant vessels of all nations. In 1856 the Crimean War was closed by a treaty which provided for the free navigation of the Danube. In 1858 Bolivia by treaty declared that it regarded the rivers Amazon and La Plata in accordance with fixed principles of national law as highways or channels opened by nature for the commerce of all nations. In 1859 the Paraguay was made free by treaty and in December 1866 the Emperor of Brazil by imperial decree declared the Amazon to be open to the frontier of Brazil to the merchant ships of all nations. The greatest living British authority on this subject while asserting the abstract right of the British claim says: It seems difficult to deny that Great Britain may ground her refusal upon strict law but it is equally difficult to deny first that in so doing she exercises harshly an extreme and hard law; secondly that her conduct with respect to the navigation of the St. Lawrence is in glaring and discreditable inconsistency with her conduct with respect to the navigation of the Mississippi. On the ground that she possessed a small domain in which the Mississippi took its rise she insisted on the right to navigate the entire volume of its waters. On the ground that she possesses both banks of the St. Lawrence where it disembogues itself into the sea she denies to the United States the right of navigation though about one-half of the waters of Lakes Ontario. Erie Huron and Superior and the whole of Lake Michigan through which the river flows are the property of the United States. The whole nation is interested in securing cheap transportation from the agricultural States of the West to the Atlantic Seaboard. To the citizens of those States it secures a greater return for their labor; to the inhabitants of the seaboard it affords cheaper food; to the nation an increase in the annual surplus of wealth. It is hoped that the Government of Great Britain will see the justice of abandoning the narrow and inconsistent claim to which her Canadian Provinces have urged her adherence. Our depressed commerce is a subject to which I called your special attention at the last session and suggested that we will in the future have to look more to the countries south of us and to China and Japan for its revival. Our representatives to all these Governments have exerted their influence to encourage trade between the United States and the countries to which they are accredited. But the fact exists that the carrying is done almost entirely in foreign bottoms and while this state of affairs exists we can not control our due share of the commerce of the world; that between the Pacific States and China and Japan is about all the carrying trade now conducted in American vessels. I would recommend a liberal policy toward that line of American steamers--one that will insure its success and even increased usefulness. The cost of building iron vessels the only ones that can compete with foreign ships in the carrying trade is so much greater in the United States than in foreign countries that without some assistance from the Government they can not be successfully built here. There will be several propositions laid before Congress in the course of the present session looking to a remedy for this evil. Even if it should be at some cost to the National Treasury I hope such encouragement will be given as will secure American shipping on the high seas and American shipbuilding at home. The condition of the archives at the Department of State calls for the early action of Congress. The building now rented by that Department is a frail structure at an inconvenient distance from the Executive Mansion and from the other Departments is ill adapted to the purpose for which it is used has not capacity to accommodate the archives and is not fireproof. Its remote situation its slender construction and the absence of a supply of water in the neighborhood leave but little hope of safety for either the building or its contents in case of t
