To the Senate and House of Representatives: In transmitting to you this my fourth annual message it is with thankfulness to the Giver of All Good that as a nation we have been blessed for the past year with peace at home peace abroad and a general prosperity vouchsafed to but few peoples. With the exception of the recent devastating fire which swept from the earth with a breath as it were millions of accumulated wealth in the city of Boston there has been no overshadowing calamity within the year to record. It is gratifying to note how like their fellow-citizens of the city of Chicago under similar circumstances a year earlier the citizens of Boston are rallying under their misfortunes and the prospect that their energy and perseverance will overcome all obstacles and show the same prosperity soon that they would had no disaster befallen them. Otherwise we have been free from pestilence war and calamities which often overtake nations; and as far as human judgment can penetrate the future no cause seems to exist to threaten our present peace. When Congress adjourned in June last a question had been raised by Great Britain and was then pending which for a time seriously imperiled the settlement by friendly arbitration of the grave differences between this Government and that of Her Britannic Majesty which by the treaty of Washington had been referred to the tribunal of arbitration which had met at Geneva in Switzerland. The arbitrators however disposed of the question which had jeoparded the whole of the treaty and threatened to involve the two nations in most unhappy relations toward each other in a manner entirely satisfactory to this Government and in accordance with the views and the policy which it had maintained. The tribunal which had convened at Geneva in December concluded its laborious session on the 14th day of September last on which day having availed itself of the discretionary power given to it by the treaty to award a sum in gross it made its decision whereby it awarded the sum of $15500000 in gold as the indemnity to be paid by Great Britain to the United States for the satisfaction of all the claims referred to its consideration. This decision happily disposes of a long-standing difference between the two Governments and in connection with another award made by the German Emperor under a reference to him by the same treaty leaves these two Governments without a shadow upon the friendly relations which it is my sincere hope may forever remain equally unclouded. The report of the agent of the United States appointed to attend the Geneva tribunal accompanied by the protocols of the proceedings of the arbitrators the arguments of the counsel of both Governments the award of the tribunal and the opinions given by the several arbitrators is transmitted herewith. I have caused to be communicated to the heads of the three friendly powers who complied with the joint request made to them under the treaty the thanks of this Government for the appointment of arbitrators made by them respectively and also my thanks to the eminent personages named by them and my appreciation of the dignity patience impartiality and great ability with which they discharged their arduous and high functions. Her Majesty's Government has communicated to me the appreciation by Her Majesty of the ability and indefatigable industry displayed by Mr. Adams the arbitrator named on the part of this Government during the protracted inquiries and discussions of the tribunal. I cordially unite with Her Majesty in this appreciation. It is due to the agent of the United States before the tribunal to record my high appreciation of the marked ability unwearied patience and the prudence and discretion with which he has conducted the very responsible and delicate duties committed to him as it is also due to the learned and eminent counsel who attended the tribunal on the part of this Government to express my sense of the talents and wisdom which they brought to bear in the attainment of the result so happily reached. It will be the province of Congress to provide for the distribution among those who may be entitled to it of their respective shares of the money to be paid. Although the sum awarded is not payable until a year from the date of the award it is deemed advisable that no time be lost in making a proper examination of the several cases in which indemnification may be due. I consequently recommend the creation of a board of commissioners for the purpose. By the thirty-fourth article of the treaty of Washington the respective claims of the United States and of Great Britain' in their construction of the treaty of the 15th of June 1846 defining the boundary line between their respective territories were submitted to the arbitration and award of His Majesty the Emperor of Germany to decide which of those claims is most in accordance with the true interpretation of the treaty of 1846. His Majesty the Emperor of Germany having been pleased to undertake the arbitration has the earnest thanks of this Government and of the people of the United States for the labor pains and care which he has devoted to the consideration of this long-pending difference. I have caused an expression of my thanks to be communicated to His Majesty. Mr. Bancroft the representative of this Government at Berlin conducted the case and prepared the statement on the part of the United States with the ability that his past services justified the public in expecting at his hands. As a member of the Cabinet at the date of the treaty which has given rise to the discussion between the two Governments as the minister to Great Britain when the construction now pronounced unfounded was first advanced and as the agent and representative of the Government to present the case and to receive the award he has been associated with the question in all of its phases and in every stage has manifested a patriotic zeal and earnestness in maintenance of the claim of the United States. He is entitled to much credit for the success which has attended the submission. After a patient investigation of the case and of the statements of each party His Majesty the Emperor on the 21st day of October last signed his award in writing decreeing that the claim of the Government of the United States that the boundary line between the territories of Her Britannic Majesty and the United States should be drawn through the Haro Channel is most in accordance with the true interpretation of the treaty concluded on the 15th of June 1846 between the Governments of Her Britannic Majesty and of the United States. Copies of the "case" presented on behalf of each Government and of the "statement in reply" of each and a translation of the award are transmitted herewith. This award confirms the United States in their claim to the important archipelago of islands lying between the continent and Vancouvers Island which for more than twenty-six years (ever since the ratification of the treaty) Great Britain has contested and leaves us for the first time in the history of the United States as a nation without a question of disputed boundary between our territory and the possessions of Great Britain on this continent. It is my grateful duty to acknowledge the prompt spontaneous action of Her Majesty's Government in giving effect to the award. In anticipation of any request from this Government and before the reception in the United States of the award signed by the Emperor Her Majesty had given instructions for the removal of her troops which had been stationed there and for the cessation of all exercise or claim of jurisdiction so as to leave the United States in the exclusive possession of the lately disputed territory. I am gratified to be able to announce that the orders for the removal of the troops have been executed and that the military joint occupation of San Juan has ceased. The islands are now in the exclusive possession of the United States. It now becomes necessary to complete the survey and determination of that portion of the boundary line (through the Haro Channel) upon which the commission which determined the remaining part of the line were unable to agree. I recommend the appointment of a commission to act jointly with one which may be named by Her Majesty for that purpose. Experience of the difficulties attending the determination of our admitted line of boundary after the occupation of the territory and its settlement by those owing allegiance to the respective Governments points to the importance of establishing by natural objects or other monuments the actual line between the territory acquired by purchase from Russia and the adjoining possessions of Her Britannic Majesty. The region is now so sparsely occupied that no conflicting interests of individuals or of jurisdiction are likely to interfere to the delay or embarrassment of the actual location of the line. If deferred until population shall enter and occupy the territory some trivial contest of neighbors may again array the two Governments in antagonism. I therefore recommend the appointment of a commission to act jointly with one that may be appointed on the part of Great Britain to determine the line between our Territory of Alaska and the conterminous possessions of Great Britain. In my last annual message I recommended the legislation necessary on the part of the United States to bring into operation the articles of the treaty of Washington of May 8 1871 relating to the fisheries and to other matters touching the relations of the United States toward the British North American possessions to become operative so soon as the proper legislation should be had on the part of Great Britain and its possessions. That legislation on the part of Great Britain and its possessions had not then been had and during the session of Congress a question was raised which for the time raised a doubt whether any action by Congress in the direction indicated would become important. This question has since been disposed of and I have received notice that the Imperial Parliament and the legislatures of the provincial governments have passed laws to carry the provisions of the treaty on the matters referred to into operation. I therefore recommend your early adoption of the legislation in the same direction necessary on the part of this Government. The joint commission for determining the boundary line between the United States and the British possessions between the Lake of the Woods and the Rocky Mountains has organized and entered upon its work. It is desirable that the force be increased in order that the completion of the survey and determination of the line may be the sooner attained. To this end I recommend that a sufficient appropriation be made. With France our earliest ally; Russia the constant and steady friend of the United States; Germany with whose Government and people we have so many causes of friendship and so many common sympathies and the other powers of Europe our relations are maintained on the most friendly terms. Since my last annual message the exchange has been made of the ratifications of a treaty with the Austro-Hungarian Empire relating to naturalization; also of a treaty with the German Empire respecting consuls and trade-marks; also of a treaty with Sweden and Norway relating to naturalization; all of which treaties have been duly proclaimed. Congress at its last session having made an appropriation to defray the expense of commissioners on the part of the United States to the International Statistical Congress at St. Petersburg the persons appointed in that character proceeded to their destination and attended the sessions of the congress. Their report shall in due season be laid before you. This congress meets at intervals of about three years and has held its sessions in several of the countries of Europe. I submit to your consideration the propriety of extending an invitation to the congress to hold its next meeting in the United States. The Centennial Celebration to be held in 1876 would afford an appropriate occasion for such meeting. Preparations are making for the international exposition to be held during the next year in Vienna on a scale of very great magnitude. The tendency of these expositions is in the direction of advanced civilization and of the elevation of industry and of labor and of the increase of human happiness as well as of greater intercourse and good will between nations. As this exposition is to be the first which will have been held in eastern Europe it is believed that American inventors and manufacturers will be ready to avail themselves of the opportunity for the presentation of their productions if encouraged by proper aid and protection. At the last session of Congress authority was given for the appointment of one or more agents to represent this Government at the exposition. The authority thus given has been exercised but in the absence of any appropriation there is danger that the important benefits which the occasion offers will in a large degree be lost to citizens of the United States. I commend the subject strongly to your consideration and recommend that an adequate appropriation be made for the purpose. To further aid American exhibitors at the Vienna Exposition I would recommend in addition to an appropriation of money that the Secretary of the Navy be authorized to fit up two naval vessels to transport between our Atlantic cities and Trieste or the most convenient port to Vienna and back their articles for exhibition. Since your last session the President of the Mexican Republic distinguished by his high character and by his services to his country has died. His temporary successor has now been elected with great unanimity by the people a proof of confidence on their part in his patriotism and wisdom which it is believed will be confirmed by the results of his administration. It is particularly desirable that nothing should be left undone by the Government of either Republic to strengthen their relations as neighbors and friends. It is much to be regretted that many lawless acts continue to disturb the quiet of the settlements on the border between our territory and that of Mexico and that complaints of wrongs to American citizens in various parts of the country are made. The revolutionary condition in which the neighboring Republic has so long been involved has in some degree contributed to this disturbance. It is to be hoped that with a more settled rule of order through the Republic which may be expected from the present Government the acts of which just complaint is made will cease. The proceedings of the commission under the convention with Mexico of the 4th of July 1868 on the subject of claims have unfortunately been checked by an obstacle for the removal of which measures have been taken by the two Governments which it is believed will prove successful. The commissioners appointed pursuant to the joint resolution of Congress of the 7th of May last to inquire into depredations on the Texan frontier have diligently made investigations in that quarter. Their report upon the subject will be communicated to you. Their researches were necessarily incomplete partly on account of the limited appropriation made by Congress. Mexico on the part of that Government has appointed a similar commission to investigate these outrages. It is not announced officially but the press of that country states that the fullest investigation is desired and that the cooperation of all parties concerned is invited to secure that end. I therefore recommend that a special appropriation be made at the earliest day practicable to enable the commissioners on the part of the United States to return to their labors without delay. It is with regret that I have again to announce a continuance of the disturbed condition of the island of Cuba. No advance toward the pacification of the discontented part of the population has been made. While the insurrection has gained no advantages and exhibits no more of the elements of power or of the prospects of ultimate success than were exhibited a year ago Spain on the other hand has not succeeded in its repression and the parties stand apparently in the same relative attitude which they have occupied for a long time past. This contest has lasted now for more than four years. Were its scene at a distance from our neighborhood we might be indifferent to its result although humanity could not be unmoved by many of its incidents wherever they might occur. It is however at our door. I can not doubt that the continued maintenance of slavery in Cuba is among the strongest inducements to the continuance of this strife. A terrible wrong is the natural cause of a terrible evil. The abolition of slavery and the introduction of other reforms in the administration of government in Cuba could not fail to advance the restoration of peace and order. It is greatly to be hoped that the present liberal Government of Spain will voluntarily adopt this view. The law of emancipation which was passed more than two years since has remained unexecuted in the absence of regulations for its enforcement. It was but a feeble step toward emancipation but it was the recognition of right and was hailed as such and exhibited Spain in harmony with sentiments of humanity and of justice and in sympathy with the other powers of the Christian and civilized world. Within the past few weeks the regulations for carrying out the law of emancipation have been announced giving evidence of the sincerity of intention of the present Government to carry into effect the law of 1870. I have not failed to urge the consideration of the wisdom the policy and the justice of a more effective system for the abolition of the great evil which oppresses a race and continues a bloody and destructive contest close to our border as well as the expediency and the justice of conceding reforms of which the propriety is not questioned. Deeply impressed with the conviction that the continuance of slavery is one of the most active causes of the continuance of the unhappy condition in Cuba I regret to believe that citizens of the United States or those claiming to be such are large holders in Cuba of what is there claimed as property but which is forbidden and denounced by the laws of the United States. They are thus in defiance of the spirit of our own laws contributing to the continuance of this distressing and sickening contest. In my last annual message I referred to this subject and I again recommend such legislation as may be proper to denounce and if not prevent at least to discourage American citizens from holding or dealing in slaves. It is gratifying to announce that the ratifications of the convention concluded under the auspices of this Government between Spain on the one part and the allied Republics of the Pacific on the other providing for an armistice have been exchanged. A copy of the instrument is herewith submitted. It is hoped that this may be followed by a permanent peace between the same parties. The differences which at one time threatened the maintenance of peace between Brazil and the Argentine Republic it is hoped are in the way of satisfactory adjustment. With these States as with the Republics of Central and of South America we continue to maintain the most friendly relations. It is with regret however I announce that the Government of Venezuela has made no further payments on account of the awards under the convention of the 25th of April 1866. That Republic is understood to be now almost if not quite tranquilized. It is hoped therefore that it will lose no time in providing for the unpaid balance of its debt to the United States which having originated in injuries to our citizens by Venezuelan authorities and having been acknowledged pursuant to a treaty in the most solemn form known among nations would seem to deserve a preference over debts of a different origin and contracted in a different manner. This subject is again recommended to the attention of Congress for such action as may be deemed proper. Our treaty relations with Japan remain unchanged. An imposing embassy from that interesting and progressive nation visited this country during the year that is passing but being unprovided with powers for the signing of a convention in this country no conclusion in that direction was reached. It is hoped however that the interchange of opinions which took place during their stay in this country has led to a mutual appreciation of the interests which may be promoted when the revision of the existing treaty shall be undertaken. In this connection I renew my recommendation of one year ago that-- To give importance to and to add to the efficiency of our diplomatic relations with Japan and China and to further aid in retaining the good opinion of those peoples and to secure to the United States its share of the commerce destined to flow between those nations and the balance of the commercial world an appropriation be made to support at least four American youths in each of those countries to serve as a part of the official family of our ministers there. Our representatives would not even then be placed upon an equality with the representatives of Great Britain and of some other powers. As now situated our representatives in Japan and China have to depend for interpreters and translators upon natives of those countries who know our language imperfectly or procure for the occasion the services of employees in foreign business houses or the interpreters to other foreign ministers. I renew the recommendation made on a previous occasion of the transfer to the Department of the Interior to which they seem more appropriately to belong of all the powers and duties in relation to the Territories with which the Department of State is now charged by law or by custom. Congress from the beginning of the Government has wisely made provision for the relief of distressed seamen in foreign countries. No similar provision however has hitherto been made for the relief of citizens in distress abroad other than seamen. It is understood to be customary with other governments to authorize consuls to extend such relief to their citizens or subjects in certain cases. A similar authority and an appropriation to carry it into effect are recommended in the case of citizens of the United States destitute or sick under such circumstances. It is well known that such citizens resort to foreign countries in great numbers. Though most of them are able to bear the expenses incident to locomotion there are some who through accident or otherwise become penniless and have no friends at home able to succor them. Persons in this situation must either perish cast themselves upon the charity of foreigners or be relieved at the private charge of our own officers who usually even with the most benevolent dispositions have nothing to spare for such purposes. Should the authority and appropriation asked for be granted care will be taken so to carry the beneficence of Congress into effect that it shall not be unnecessarily or unworthily bestowed. TREASURY . The moneys received and covered into the Treasury during the fiscal year ended June 30 1872 were: From customs $216370286.77 From sales of public lands 2575714.19 From internal revenue 130642177.72 From tax on national-bank circulation etc 6523396.39 From Pacific railway companies 749861.87 From customs fines etc 1136442.34 From fees--consular patent lands etc 2284095.92 From miscellaneous 412254.71 Total ordinary receipts 364694229.91 From premium on sales of coin 9412637.65 Total net receipts 374106867.65 Balance in Treasury June 30 1871 (including $18228.35 received from "unavailable") 109935705.59 Total available cash 484042573.15 The net expenditures by warrants during the same period were: For civil expenses $16187059.20 For foreign intercourse 1839369.14 For Indians 7061728.82 For pensions 28533402.76 For military establishment including fortifications river and harbor improvements and arsenals 35372157.20 For naval establishments including vessels and machinery and improvements at navy-yards 21249809.99 For miscellaneous civil including public buildings light-houses and collecting the revenue 42958329.08 For interest on the public debt 117357839.72 Total exclusive of principal and premium on the public debt 270559695.91 For premium on bonds purchased $6958266.76 For redemption of the public debt 99960253.54 106918520.30 Total net disbursements 377478216.21 Balance in Treasury June 30 1872 106564356.94 Total 484042573.15 From the foregoing statement it appears that the net reduction of the principal of the debt during the fiscal year ending June 30 1872 was $99960253.54. The source of this reduction is as follows: Net ordinary receipts during the year $364694229.91 Net ordinary expenditures including interest on the public debt 270559695.91 Leaving surplus revenue 94134534.00 Add amount received from premium on sales of gold in excess of the premium paid on bonds purchased 2454370.89 Add the amount of the reduction of the cash balance at the close of the year accompanied with same at commencement of the year 3371348.65 Total 99960253.54 This statement treats solely of the principal of the public debt. By the monthly statement of the public debt which adds together the principal interest due and unpaid and interest accrued to date not due and deducts the cash in the Treasury as ascertained on the day of publication the reduction was $100544491.28. The source of this reduction is as follows: Reduction in principal account $99960003.54 Reduction in unpaid-interest account 3330952.96 Reduction in cash on hand 103290956.50 2746465.22 100544491.28 On the basis of the last table the statements show a reduction of the public debt from the 1st of March 1869 to the present time as follows: From March 1 1869 to March 1 1870 $87134782.84 From March 1 1870 to March 1 1871 117619630.25 From March 1 1871 to March 1 1872 94895348.94 From March 1 1872 to November 1 1872 (eight months) 64047237.84 Total 363696999.87 With the great reduction of taxation by the acts of Congress at its last session the expenditure of the Government in collecting the revenue will be much reduced for the next fiscal year. It is very doubtful however whether any further reduction of so vexatious a burden upon any people will be practicable for the present. At all events as a measure of justice to the holders of the nation's certificates of indebtedness I would recommend that no more legislation be had on this subject unless it be to correct errors of omission or commission in the present laws until sufficient time has elapsed to prove that it can be done and still leave sufficient revenue to meet current expenses of Government pay interest on the public debt and provide for the sinking fund established by law. The preservation of our national credit is of the highest importance; next in importance to this comes a solemn duty to provide a national currency of fixed unvarying value as compared with gold and as soon as practicable having due regard for the interests of the debtor class and the vicissitudes of trade and commerce convertible into gold at par. WAR DEPARTMENT. The report of the Secretary of War shows the expenditures of the War Department for the fiscal year ending June 30 1871 to be $35799991.82 and for the fiscal year ending June 30 1872 to be $35372157.20 showing a reduction in favor of the last fiscal year of $427834.62. The estimates for military appropriations for the next fiscal year ending June 30 1874 are $33801378.78. The estimates of the Chief of Engineers are submitted separately for fortifications river and harbor improvements and for public buildings and grounds and the Washington Aqueduct. The affairs of the Freedmen's Bureau have all been transferred to the War Department and regulations have been put into execution for the speedy payment of bounty pay etc. due colored soldiers properly coming under that Bureau. All war accounts for money and property prior to 1871 have been examined and transmitted to the Treasury for final settlement. During the fiscal year there has been paid for transportation on railroads $1300000 of which $800857 was over the Pacific railroads; for transportation by water $626373.52 and by stage $48975.84; for the purchase of transportation animals wagons hire of teamsters etc. $924650.64. About $370000 have been collected from Southern railroads during the year leaving about $4000000 still due. The Quartermaster has examined and transmitted to the accounting officers for settlement $367172.72 of claims by loyal citizens for quartermaster stores taken during the war. Subsistence supplies to the amount of $89048.12 have been issued to Indians. The annual average mean strength of the Army was 24101 white and 2494 colored soldiers. The total deaths for the year reported were 367 white and 54 colored. The distribution of the Medical and Surgical History of the War is yet to be ordered by Congress. There exists an absolute necessity for a medical corps of the full number established by act of Congress of July 28 1866 there being now fifty-nine vacancies and the number of successful candidates rarely exceeds eight or ten in any one year. The river and harbor improvements have been carried on with energy and economy. Though many are only partially completed the results have saved to commerce many times the amount expended. The increase of commerce with greater depths of channels greater security in navigation and the saving of time adds millions to the wealth of the country and increases the resources of the Government. The bridge across the Mississippi River at Rock Island has been completed and the proper site has been determined upon for the bridge at La Crosse. The able and exhaustive report made by the commission appointed to investigate the Sutro Tunnel has been transmitted to Congress. The observations and reports of the Signal Office have been continued. Stations have been maintained at each of the principal lake seaport and river cities. Ten additional stations have been established in the United States and arrangements have been made for an exchange of reports with Canada and a similar exchange of observations is contemplated with the West India Islands. The favorable attention of Congress is invited to the following recommendations of the Secretary of War: A discontinuance of the appointment of extra lieutenants to serve as adjutants and quartermasters; the adoption of a code providing specific penalties for well-defined offenses so that the inequality of sentences adjudged by courts-martial may be adjusted; the consolidation of accounts under which expenditures are made as a measure of economy; a reappropriation of the money for the construction of a depot at San Antonio the title to the site being now perfected; a special act placing the cemetery at the City of Mexico on the same basis as other national cemeteries; authority to purchase sites for military posts in Texas; the appointment of commissary sergeants from noncommissioned officers as a measure for securing the better care and protection of supplies; an appropriation for the publication of the catalogue and tables of the anatomical section of the Army Medical Museum; a reappropriation of the amount for the manufacture of breech-loading arms should the selection be so delayed by the board of officers as to leave the former appropriation unexpended at the close of the fiscal year; the sale of such arsenals east of the Mississippi as can be spared and the proceeds applied to the establishment of one large arsenal of construction and repair upon the Atlantic Coast and the purchase of a suitable site for a proving and experimental ground for heavy ordnance; the abrogation of laws which deprive inventors in the United States service from deriving any benefit from their inventions; the repeal of the law prohibiting promotions in the staff corps; a continuance of the work upon coast defenses; the repeal of the seventh section of the act of July 13 1866 taking from engineer soldiers the per diem granted to other troops; a limitation of time for presentation of old war claims for subsistence supplies under act of July 4 1864; and a modification in the mode of the selection of cadets for the Military Academy in order to enhance the usefulness of the Academy which is impaired by reason of the large amount of time necessarily expended in giving new cadets a thorough knowledge of the more elementary branches of learning which they should acquire before entering the Acad
