To the Senate and House of Representatives: In submitting my seventh annual message to Congress in this centennial year of our national existence as a free and independent people it affords me great pleasure to recur to the advancement that has been made from the time of the colonies one hundred years ago. We were then a people numbering only 3000000. Now we number more than 40000000. Then industries were confined almost exclusively to the tillage of the soil. Now manufactories absorb much of the labor of the country. Our liberties remain unimpaired; the bondmen have been freed from slavery; we have become possessed of the respect if not the friendship of all civilized nations. Our progress has been great in all the arts--in science agriculture commerce navigation mining mechanics law medicine etc.; and in general education the progress is likewise encouraging. Our thirteen States have become thirty-eight including Colorado (which has taken the initiatory steps to become a State) and eight Territories including the Indian Territory and Alaska and excluding Colorado making a territory extending from the Atlantic to the Pacific. On the south we have extended to the Gulf of Mexico and in the west from the Mississippi to the Pacific. One hundred years ago the cotton gin the steamship the railroad the telegraph the reaping sewing and modern printing machines and numerous other inventions of scarcely less value to our business and happiness were entirely unknown. In 1776 manufactories scarcely existed even in name in all this vast territory. In 1870 more than 2000000 persons were employed in manufactories producing more than $2100000000 of products in amount annually nearly equal to our national debt. From nearly the whole of the population of 1776 being engaged in the one occupation of agriculture in 1870 so numerous and diversified had become the occupation of our people that less than 6000000 out of more than 40000000 were so engaged. The extraordinary effect produced in our country by a resort to diversified occupations has built a market for the products of fertile lands distant from the seaboard and the markets of the world. The American system of locating various and extensive manufactories next to the plow and the pasture and adding connecting railroads and steamboats has produced in our distant interior country a result noticeable by the intelligent portions all all commercial nations. The ingenuity and skill of American mechanics have been demonstrated at home and abroad in a manner most flattering to their pride. But for the extraordinary genius and ability of our mechanics the achievements of our agriculturists manufacturers and transporters throughout the country would have been impossible of attainment. The progress of the miner has also been great. Of coal our production has small; now many millions of tons are mined annually. So with iron which formed scarcely an appreciable part of our products half a century ago we now produce more than the world consumed at the beginning of our national existence. Lead zinc and copper from being articles of import we may expect to be large exporters of in the near future. The development of gold and silver mines in the United States and Territories has not only been remarkable but has had a large influence upon the business of all commercial nations. Our merchants in the last hundred years have had a success and have established a reputation for enterprise sagacity progress and integrity unsurpassed by peoples of older nationalities. This "good name" is not confined to their homes but goes out upon every sea and into every port where commerce enters. With equal pride we can point to our progress in all of the learned professions. As we are now about to enter upon our second centennial--commenting our manhood as a nation--it is well to look back upon the past and study what will be best to preserve and advance our future greatness From the fall of Adam for his transgression to the present day no nation has ever been free from threatened danger to its prosperity and happiness. We should look to the dangers threatening us and remedy them so far as lies in our power. We are a republic whereof one man is as good as another before the law. Under such a form of government it is of the greatest importance that all should be possessed of education and intelligence enough to cast a vote with a right understanding of its meaning. A large association of ignorant men can not for any considerable period oppose a successful resistance to tyranny and oppression from the educated few but will inevitably sink into acquiescence to the will of intelligence whether directed by the demagogue or by priestcraft. Hence the education of the masses becomes of the first necessity for the preservation of our institutions. They are worth preserving because they have secured the greatest good to the greatest proportion of the population of any form of government yet devised. All other forms of government approach it just in proportion to the general diffusion of education and independence of thought and action. As the primary step therefore to our advancement in all that has marked our progress in the past century I suggest for your earnest consideration and most earnestly recommend it that a constitutional amendment be submitted to the legislatures of the several States for ratification making it the duty of each of the several States to establish and forever maintain free public schools adequate to the education of all the children in the rudimentary branches within their respective limits irrespective of sex color birthplace or religions; forbidding the teaching in said schools of religious atheistic or pagan tenets; and prohibiting the granting of any school funds or school taxes or any part thereof either by legislative municipal or other authority for the benefit or in aid directly or indirectly of any religious sect or denomination or in aid or for the benefit of any other object of any nature or kind whatever. In connection with this important question I would also call your attention to the importance of correcting an evil that if permitted to continue will probably lead to great trouble in our land before the close of the nineteenth century. It is the accumulation of vast amounts of untaxed church property. In 1850 I believe the church property of the United States which paid no tax municipal or State amounted to about $83000000. In 1860 the amount had doubled; in 1875 it is about $1000000000. By 1900 without check it is safe to say this property will reach a sum exceeding $3000000000. So vast a sum receiving all the protection and benefits of Government without bearing its proportion of the burdens and expenses of the same will not be looked upon acquiescently by those who have to pay the taxes. In a growing country where real estate enhances so rapidly with time as in the United States there is scarcely a limit to the wealth that may be acquired by corporations religious or otherwise if allowed to retain real estate without taxation. The contemplation of so vast a property as here alluded to without taxation may lead to sequestration without constitutional authority and through blood. I would suggest the taxation of all property equally whether church or corporation exempting only the last resting place of the dead and possibly with proper restrictions church edifices. Our relations with most of the foreign powers continue on a satisfactory and friendly footing. Increased intercourse the extension of commerce and the cultivation of mutual interests have steadily improved our relations with the large majority of the powers of the world rendering practicable the peaceful solution of questions which from time to time necessarily arise leaving few which demand extended or particular notice. The correspondence of the Department of State with our diplomatic representatives abroad is transmitted herewith. I am happy to announce the passage of an act by the General Cortes of Portugal proclaimed since the adjournment of Congress for the abolition of servitude in the Portuguese colonies. It is to be hoped that such legislation may be another step toward the great consummation to be reached when no man shall be permitted directly or indirectly under any guise excuse or form of law to hold his fellow-man in bondage. I am of opinion also that it is the duty of the United States as contributing toward that end and required by the spirit of the age in which we live to provide by suitable legislation that no citizen of the United States shall hold slaves as property in any other country or be interested therein. Chile has made reparation in the case of the whale ship Good Return seized without sufficient cause upward of forty years ago. Though she had hitherto denied her accountability the denial was never acquiesced in by this Government and the justice of the claim has been so earnestly contended for that it has been gratifying that she should have at last acknowledged it. The arbitrator in the case of the United States steamer Montijo for the seizure and detention of which the Government of the United States of Colombia was held accountable has decided in favor of the claim. This decision has settled a question which had been pending for several years and which while it continued open might more or less disturb the good understanding which it is desirable should be maintained between the two Republics. A reciprocity treaty with the King of the Hawaiian Islands was concluded some months since. As it contains a stipulation that it shall not take effect until Congress shall enact the proper legislation for that purpose copies of the instrument are herewith submitted in order that if such should be the pleasure of Congress the necessary legislation upon the subject may be adopted. In March last an arrangement was made through Mr. Cushing our minister in Madrid with the Spanish Government for the payment by the latter to the United States of the sum of $80000 in coin for the purpose of the relief of the families or persons of the ship's company and certain passengers of the Virginius. This sum was to have been paid in three installments at two months each. It is due to the Spanish Government that I should state that the payments were fully and spontaneously anticipated by that Government and that the whole amount was paid within but a few days more than two months from the date of the agreement a copy of which is herewith transmitted. In pursuance of the terms of the adjustment I have directed the distribution of the amount among the parties entitled thereto including the ship's company and such of the passengers as were American citizens. Payments are made accordingly on the application by the parties entitled thereto. The past year has furnished no evidence of an approaching termination of the ruinous conflict which has been raging for seven years in the neighboring island of Cuba. The same disregard of the laws of civilized warfare and of the just demands of humanity which has heretofore called forth expressions of condemnation from the nations of Christendom has continued to blacken the sad scene. Desolation ruin and pillage are pervading the rich fields of one of the most fertile and productive regions of the earth and the incendiary's torch firing plantations and valuable factories and buildings is the agent marking the alternate advance or retreat of contending parties. The protracted continuance of this strife seriously affects the interests of all commercial nations but those of the United States more than others by reason of close proximity its larger trade and intercourse with Cuba and the frequent and intimate personal and social relations which have grown up between its citizens and those of the island. Moreover the property of our citizens in Cuba is large and is rendered insecure and depreciated in value and in capacity of production by the continuance of the strife and the unnatural mode of its conduct. The same is true differing only in degree with respect to the interests and people of other nations; and the absence of any reasonable assurance of a near termination of the conflict must of necessity soon compel the States thus suffering to consider what the interests of their own people and their duty toward themselves may demand. I have hoped that Spain would be enabled to establish peace in her colony to afford security to the property and the interests of our citizens and allow legitimate scope to trade and commerce and the natural productions of the island. Because of this hope and from an extreme reluctance to interfere in the most remote manner in the affairs of another and a friendly nation especially of one whose sympathy and friendship in the struggling infancy of our own existence must ever be remembered with gratitude I have patiently and anxiously waited the progress of events. Our own civil conflict is too recent for us not to consider the difficulties which surround a government distracted by a dynastic rebellion at home at the same time that it has to cope with a separate insurrection in a distant colony. But whatever causes may have produced the situation which so grievously affects our interests it exists with all its attendant evils operating directly upon this country and its people. Thus far all the efforts of Spain have proved abortive and time has marked no improvement in the situation. The armed bands of either side now occupy nearly the same ground as in the past with the difference from time to time of more lives sacrificed more property destroyed and wider extents of fertile and productive fields and more and more of valuable property constantly wantonly sacrificed to the incendiary's torch. In contests of this nature where a considerable body of people who have attempted to free themselves of the control of the superior government have reached such point in occupation of territory in power and in general organization as to constitute in fact a body politic; having a government in substance as well as in name; possessed of the elements of stability and equipped with the machinery for the administration of internal policy and the execution of its laws; prepared and able to administer justice at home as well as in its dealings with other powers it is within the province of those other powers to recognize its existence as a new and independent nation. In such cases other nations simply deal with an actually existing condition of things and recognize as one of the powers of the earth that body politic which possessing the necessary elements has in fact become a new power. In a word the creation of a new state is a fact. To establish the condition of things essential to the recognition of this fact there must be a people occupying a known territory united under some known and defined form of government acknowledged by those subject thereto in which the functions of government are administered by usual methods competent to mete out justice to citizens and strangers to afford remedies for public and for private wrongs and able to assume the correlative international obligations and capable of performing the corresponding international duties resulting from its acquisition of the rights of sovereignty. A power should exist complete in its organization ready to take and able to maintain its place among the nations of the earth. While conscious that the insurrection in Cuba has shown a strength and endurance which make it at least doubtful whether it be in the power of Spain to subdue it it seems unquestionable that no such civil organization exists which may be recognized as an independent government capable of performing its international obligations and entitled to be treated as one of the powers of the earth. A recognition under such circumstances would be inconsistent with the facts and would compel the power granting it soon to support by force the government to which it had really given its only claim of existence. In my judgment the United States should adhere to the policy and the principles which have heretofore been its sure and safe guides in like contests between revolted colonies and their mother country and acting only upon the clearest evidence should avoid any possibility of suspicion or of imputation. A recognition of the independence of Cuba being in my opinion impracticable and indefensible the question which next presents itself is that of the recognition of belligerent rights in the parties to the contest. In a former message to Congress I had occasion to consider this question and reached the conclusion that the conflict in Cuba dreadful and devastating as were its incidents did not rise to the fearful dignity of war. Regarding it now after this lapse of time I am unable to see that any notable success or any marked or real advance on the part of the insurgents has essentially changed the character of the contest. It has acquired greater age but not greater or more formidable proportions. It is possible that the acts of foreign powers and even acts of Spain herself of this very nature might be pointed to in defense of such recognition. But now as in its past history the United States should carefully avoid the false lights which might lead it into the mazes of doubtful law and of questionable propriety and adhere rigidly and sternly to the rule which has been its guide of doing only that which is right and honest and of good report. The question of according or of withholding rights of belligerency must be judged in every case in view of the particular attending facts. Unless justified by necessity it is always and justly regarded as an unfriendly act and a gratuitous demonstration of moral support to the rebellion. It is necessary and it is required when the interests and rights of another government or of its people are so far affected by a pending civil conflict as to require a definition of its relations to the parties thereto. But this conflict must be one which will be recognized in the sense of international law as war. Belligerence too is a fact. The mere existence of contending armed bodies and their occasional conflicts do not constitute war in the sense referred to. Applying to the existing condition of affairs in Cuba the tests recognized by publicists and writers on international law and which have been observed by nations of dignity honesty and power when free from sensitive or selfish and unworthy motives I fail to find in the insurrection the existence of such a substantial political organization real palpable and manifest to the world having the forms and capable of the ordinary functions of government toward its own people and to other states with courts for the administration of justice with a local habitation possessing such organization of force such material such occupation of territory as to take the contest out of the category of a mere rebellious insurrection or occasional skirmishes and place it on the terrible footing of war to which a recognition of belligerency would aim to elevate it. The contest moreover is solely on land; the insurrection has not possessed itself of a single seaport whence it may send forth its flag nor has it any means of communication with foreign powers except through the military lines of its adversaries. No apprehension of any of those sudden and difficult complications which a war upon the ocean is apt to precipitate upon the vessels both commercial and national and upon the consular officers of other powers calls for the definition of their relations to the parties to the contest. Considered as a question of expediency I regard the accordance of belligerent rights still to be as unwise and premature as I regard it to be at present indefensible as a measure of right. Such recognition entails upon the country according the rights which flow from it difficult and complicated duties and requires the exaction from the contending parties of the strict observance of their rights and obligations; it confers the right of search upon the high seas by vessels of both parties; it would subject the carrying of arms and munitions of war which now may be transported freely and without interruption in the vessels of the United States to detention and to possible seizure; it would give rise to countless vexatious questions would release the parent Government from responsibility for acts done by the insurgents and would invest Spain with the right to exercise the supervision recognized by our treaty of 1795 over our commerce on the high seas a very large part of which in its traffic between the Atlantic and the Gulf States and between all of them and the States on the Pacific passes through the waters which wash the shores of Cuba. The exercise of this supervision could scarce fail to lead if not to abuses certainly to collisions perilous to the peaceful relations of the two States. There can be little doubt to what result such supervision would before long draw this nation. It would be unworthy of the United States to inaugurate the possibilities of such result by measures of questionable right or expediency or by any indirection. Apart from any question of theoretical right I am satisfied that while the accordance of belligerent rights to the insurgents in Cuba might give them a hope and an inducement to protract the struggle it would be but a delusive hope and would not remove the evils which this Government and its people are experiencing but would draw the United States into complications which it has waited long and already suffered much to avoid. The recognition of independence or of belligerency being thus in my judgment equally inadmissible it remains to consider what course shall be adopted should the conflict not soon be brought to an end by acts of the parties themselves and should the evils which result therefrom affecting all nations and particularly the United States continue. In such event I am of opinion that other nations will be compelled to assume the responsibility which devolves upon them and to seriously consider the only remaining measures possible--mediation and intervention Owing perhaps to the large expanse of water separating the island from the peninsula the want of harmony and of personal sympathy between the inhabitants of the colony and those sent thither to rule them and want of adaptation of the ancient colonial system of Europe to the present times and to the ideas which the events of the past century have developed the contending parties appear to have within themselves no depository of common confidence to suggest wisdom when passion and excitement have their sway and to assume the part of peacemaker. In this view in the earlier days of the contest the good offices of the United States as a mediator were tendered in good faith without any selfish purpose in the interest of humanity and in sincere friendship for both parties but were at the time declined by Spain with the declaration nevertheless that at a future time they would be indispensable. No intimation has been received that in the opinion of Spain that time has been reached. And yet the strife continues with all its dread horrors and all its injuries to the interests of the United States and of other nations. Each party seems quite capable of working great injury and damage to the other as well as to all the relations and interests dependent on the existence of peace in the island; but they seem incapable of reaching any adjustment and both have thus far failed of achieving any success whereby one party shall possess and control the island to the exclusion of the other. Under these circumstances the agency of others either by mediation or by intervention seems to be the only alternative which must sooner or later be invoked for the termination of the strife. At the same time while thus impressed I do not at this time recommend the adoption of any measure of intervention. I shall be ready at all times and as the equal friend of both parties to respond to a suggestion that the good offices of the United States will be acceptable to aid in bringing about a peace honorable to both. It is due to Spain so far as this Government is concerned that the agency of a third power to which I have adverted shall be adopted only as a last expedient. Had it been the desire of the United States to interfere in the affairs of Cuba repeated opportunities for so doing have been presented within the last few years; but we have remained passive and have performed our whole duty and all international obligations to Spain with friendship fairness and fidelity and with a spirit of patience and forbearance which negatives every possible suggestion of desire to interfere or to add to the difficulties with which she has been surrounded. The Government of Spain has recently submitted to our minister at Madrid certain proposals which it is hoped may be found to be the basis if not the actual submission of terms to meet the requirements of the particular griefs of which this Government has felt itself entitled to complain. These proposals have not yet reached me in their full text. On their arrival they will be taken into careful examination and may I hope lead to a satisfactory adjustment of the questions to which they refer and remove the possibility of future occurrences such as have given rise to our just complaints. It is understood also that renewed efforts are being made to introduce reforms in the internal administration of the island. Persuaded however that a proper regard for the interests of the United States and of its citizens entitles it to relief from the strain to which it has been subjected by the difficulties of the questions and the wrongs and losses which arise from the contest in Cuba and that the interests of humanity itself demand the cessation of the strife before the whole island shall be laid waste and larger sacrifices of life be made I shall feel it my duty should my hopes of a satisfactory adjustment and of the early restoration of peace and the removal of future causes of complaint be unhappily disappointed to make a further communication to Congress at some period not far remote and during the present session recommending what may then seem to me to be necessary. The free zone so called several years since established by the Mexican Government in certain of the States of that Republic adjacent to our frontier remains in full operation. It has always been materially injurious to honest traffic for it operates as an incentive to traders in Mexico to supply without customs charges the wants of inhabitants on this side of the line and prevents the same wants from being supplied by merchants of the United States thereby to a considerable extent defrauding our revenue and checking honest commercial enterprise. Depredations by armed bands from Mexico on the people of Texas near the frontier continue. Though the main object of these incursions is robbery they frequently result in the murder of unarmed and peaceably disposed persons and in some instances even the United States post-offices and mail communications have been attacked. Renewed remonstrances upon this subject have been addressed to the Mexican Government but without much apparent effect. The military force of this Government disposable for service in that quarter is quite inadequate to effectually guard the line even at those points where the incursions are usually made. An experiment of an armed vessel on the Rio Grande for that purpose is on trial and it is hoped that if not thwarted by the shallowness of the river and other natural obstacles it may materially contribute to the protection of the herdsmen of Texas. The proceedings of the joint commission under the convention between the United States and Mexico of the 4th of July 1868 on the subject of claims will soon be brought to a close. The result of those proceedings will then be communicated to Congress. I am happy to announce that the Government of Venezuela has upon further consideration practically abandoned its objection to pay to the United States that share of its revenue which some years since it allotted toward the extinguishment of the claims of foreigners generally. In thus reconsidering its determination that Government has shown a just sense of self-respect which can not fail to reflect credit upon it in the eyes of all disinterested persons elsewhere. It is to be regretted however that its payments on account of claims of citizens of the United States are still so meager in amount and that the stipulations of the treaty in regard to the sums to be paid and the periods when those payments were to take place should have been so signally disregarded. Since my last annual message the exchange has been made of the ratification of a treaty of commerce and navigation with Belgium and of conventions with the Mexican Republic for the further extension of the joint commission respecting claims; with the Hawaiian Islands for commercial reciprocity and with the Ottoman Empire for extradition; all of which have been duly proclaimed. The Court of Commissioners of Alabama Claims has prosecuted its important duties very assiduously and very satisfactorily. It convened and was organized on the 22d day of July 1874 and by the terms of the act under which it was created was to exist for one year from that date. The act provided however that should it be found impracticable to complete the work of the court before the expiration of the year the President might by proclamation extend the time of its duration to a period not more than six months beyond the expiration of the one year. Having received satisfactory evidence that it would be impracticable to complete the work within the time originally fixed I issued a proclamation (a copy of which is presented herewith) extending the time of duration of the court for a period of six months from and after the 22d day of July last. A report made through the clerk of the court (communicated herewith) shows the condition of the calendar on the 1st of November last and the large amount of work which has been accomplished. One thousand three hundred and eighty-two claims have been presented of which 682 had been disposed of at the date of the report. I am informed that 170 cases were decided during the month of November. Arguments are being made and decisions given in the remaining cases with all the dispatch consistent with the proper consideration of the questions submitted. Many of these claims are in behalf of mariners or depend on the evidence of mariners whose absence has delayed the taking or the return of the necessary evidence. It is represented to me that it will be impracticable for the court to finally dispose of all the cases before it within the present limit of its duration. Justice to the parties claimant who have been at large expense in preparing their claims and obtaining the evidence in their support suggests a short extension to enable the court to dispose of all of the claims which have been presented. I recommend the legislation which may be deemed proper to enable the court to complete the work before it. I recommend that some suitable provision be made by the creation of a special court or by conferring the necessary jurisdiction upon some appropriate tribunal for the consideration and determination of the claims of aliens against the Government of the United States which have arisen within some reasonable limitation of time or which may hereafter arise excluding all claims barred by treaty provisions or otherwise. It has been found impossible to give proper consideration to these claims by the Executive Departments of the Government. Such a tribunal would afford an opportunity to aliens other than British subjects to present their claims on account of acts committed against their persons or property during the rebellion as also to those subjects of Great Britain whose claims having arisen subsequent to the 9th day of April 1865 could not be presented to the late commission organized pursuant to the provisions of the treaty of Washington. The electric telegraph has become an essential and indispensable agent in the transmission of business and social messages. Its operation on land and within the limit of particular states is necessarily under the control of the jurisdiction within which it operates. The lines on the high seas however are not subject to the particular control of any one government. In 1869 a concession was granted by the French Government to a company which proposed to lay a cable from the shores of France to the United States. At that time 
