To the Congress of the United States: Since the close of your last session the American people in the exercise of their highest right of suffrage have chosen their Chief Magistrate for the four years ensuing. When it is remembered that at no period in the country's history has the long political contest which customarily precedes the day of the national election been waged with greater fervor and intensity it is a subject of general congratulation that after the controversy at the polls was over and while the slight preponderance by which the issue had been determined was as yet unascertained the public peace suffered no disturbance but the people everywhere patiently and quietly awaited the result. Nothing could more strikingly illustrate the temper of the American citizen his love of order and his loyalty to law. Nothing could more signally demonstrate the strength and wisdom of our political institutions. Eight years have passed since a controversy concerning the result of a national election sharply called the attention of the Congress to the necessity of providing more precise and definite regulations for counting the electoral vote. It is of the gravest importance that this question be solved before conflicting claims to the Presidency shall again distract the country and I am persuaded that by the people at large any of the measures of relief thus far proposed would be preferred to continued inaction. Our relations with all foreign powers continue to be amicable. With Belgium a convention has been signed whereby the scope of present treaties has been so enlarged as to secure to citizens of either country within the jurisdiction of the other equal rights and privileges in the acquisition and alienation of property. A trade-marks treaty has also been concluded. The war between Chile and Peru is at an end. For the arbitration of the claims of American citizens who during its continuance suffered through the acts of the Chilean authorities a convention will soon be negotiated. The state of hostilities between France and China continues to be an embarrassing feature of our Eastern relations. The Chinese Government has promptly adjusted and paid the claims of American citizens whose property was destroyed in the recent riots at Canton. I renew the recommendation of my last annual message that the Canton indemnity fund be returned to China. The true interpretation of the recent treaty with that country permitting the restriction of Chinese immigration is likely to be again the subject of your deliberations. It may be seriously questioned whether the statute passed at the last session does not violate the treaty rights of certain Chinese who left this country with return certificates valid under the old law and who now seem to be debarred from relanding for lack of the certificates required by the new. The recent purchase by citizens of the United States of a large trading fleet heretofore under the Chinese flag has considerably enhanced our commercial importance in the East. In view of the large number of vessels built or purchased by American citizens in other countries and exclusively employed in legitimate traffic between foreign ports under the recognized protection of our flag it might be well to provide a uniform rule for their registration and documentation so that the bona fide property rights of our citizens therein shall be duly evidenced and properly guarded. Pursuant to the advice of the Senate at the last session I recognized the flag of the International Association of the Kongo as that of a friendly government avoiding in so doing any prejudgment of conflicting territorial claims in that region. Subsequently in execution of the expressed wish of the Congress I appointed a commercial agent for the Kongo basin. The importance of the rich prospective trade of the Kongo Valley has led to the general conviction that it should be open to all nations upon equal terms. At an international conference for the consideration of this subject called by the Emperor of Germany and now in session at Berlin delegates are in attendance on behalf of the United States. Of the results of the conference you will be duly advised. The Government of Korea has generously aided the efforts of the United States minister to secure suitable premises for the use of the legation. As the conditions of diplomatic intercourse with Eastern nations demand that the legation premises be owned by the represented power I advise that an appropriation be made for the acquisition of this property by the Government. The United States already possess valuable premises at Tangier as a gift from the Sultan of Morocco. As is stated hereafter they have lately received a similar gift from the Siamese Government. The Government of Japan stands ready to present to us extensive grounds at Tokyo whereon to erect a suitable building for the legation court-house and jail and similar privileges can probably be secured in China and Persia. The owning of such premises would not only effect a large saving of the present rentals but would permit of the due assertion of extraterritorial rights in those countries and would the better serve to maintain the dignity of the United States. The failure of Congress to make appropriation for our representation at the autonomous court of the Khedive has proved a serious embarrassment in our intercourse with Egypt; and in view of the necessary intimacy of diplomatic relationship due to the participation of this Government as one of the treaty powers in all matters of administration there affecting the rights of foreigners I advise the restoration of the agency and consulate-general at Cairo on its former basis. I do not conceive it to be the wish of Congress that the United States should withdraw altogether from the honorable position they have hitherto held with respect to the Khedive or that citizens of this Republic residing or sojourning in Egypt should hereafter be without the aid and protection of a competent representative. With France the traditional cordial relationship continues. The colossal statue of Liberty Enlightening the World the generous gift of the people of France is expected to reach New York in May next. I suggest that Congressional action be taken in recognition of the spirit which has prompted this gift and in aid of the timely completion of the pedestal upon which it is to be placed. Our relations with Germany a country which contributes to our own some of the best elements of citizenship continue to be cordial. The United States have extradition treaties with several of the German States but by reason of the confederation of those States under the imperial rule the application of such treaties is not as uniform and comprehensive as the interests of the two countries require. I propose therefore to open negotiations for a single convention of extradition to embrace all the territory of the Empire. It affords me pleasure to say that our intercourse with Great Britain continues to be of a most friendly character. The Government of Hawaii has indicated its willingness to continue for seven years the provisions of the existing reciprocity treaty. Such continuance in view of the relations of that country to the American system of States should in my judgment be favored. The revolution in Hayti against the established Government has terminated. While it was in progress it became necessary to enforce our neutrality laws by instituting proceedings against individuals and vessels charged with their infringement. These prosecutions were in all cases successful. Much anxiety has lately been displayed by various European Governments and especially by the Government of Italy for the abolition of our import duties upon works of art. It is well to consider whether the present discrimination in favor of the productions of American artists abroad is not likely to result as they themselves seem very generally to believe it may in the practical exclusion of our painters and sculptors from the rich fields for observation study and labor which they have hitherto enjoyed. There is prospect that the long-pending revision of the foreign treaties of Japan may be concluded at a new conference to be held at Tokyo. While this Government fully recognizes the equal and independent station of Japan in the community of nations it would not oppose the general adoption of such terms of compromise as Japan may be disposed to offer in furtherance of a uniform policy of intercourse with Western nations. During the past year the increasing good will between our own Government and that of Mexico has been variously manifested. The treaty of commercial reciprocity concluded January 20 1883 has been ratified and awaits the necessary tariff legislation of Congress to become effective. This legislation will I doubt not be among the first measures to claim your attention. A full treaty of commerce navigation and consular rights is much to be desired and such a treaty I have reason to believe that the Mexican Government stands ready to conclude. Some embarrassment has been occasioned by the failure of Congress at its last session to provide means for the due execution of the treaty of July 29 1882 for the resurvey of the Mexican boundary and the relocation of boundary monuments. With the Republic of Nicaragua a treaty has been concluded which authorizes the construction by the United States of a canal railway and telegraph line across the Nicaraguan territory. By the terms of this treaty 60 miles of the river San Juan as well as Lake Nicaragua an inland sea 40 miles in width are to constitute a part of the projected enterprise. This leaves for actual canal construction 17 miles on the Pacific side and 36 miles on the Atlantic. To the United States whose rich territory on the Pacific is for the ordinary purposes of commerce practically cut off from communication by water with the Atlantic ports the political and commercial advantages of such a project can scarcely be overestimated. It is believed that when the treaty is laid before you the justice and liberality of its provisions will command universal approval at home and abroad. The death of our representative at Russia while at his post at St. Petersburg afforded to the Imperial Government a renewed opportunity to testify its sympathy in a manner befitting the intimate friendliness which has ever marked the intercourse of the two countries. The course of this Government in raising its representation at Bangkok to the diplomatic rank has evoked from Siam evidences of warm friendship and augurs well for our enlarged intercourse. The Siamese Government has presented to the United States a commodious mansion and grounds for the occupancy of the legation and I suggest that by joint resolution Congress attest its appreciation of this generous gift. This government has more than once been called upon of late to take action in fulfillment of its international obligations toward Spain. Agitation in the island of Cuba hostile to the Spanish Crown having been fomented by persons abusing the sacred rights of hospitality which our territory affords the officers of this Government have been instructed to exercise vigilance to prevent infractions of our neutrality laws at Key West and at other points near the Cuban coast. I am happy to say that in the only instance where these precautionary measures were successfully eluded the offenders when found in our territory were subsequently tried and convicted. The growing need of close relationship of intercourse and traffic between the Spanish Antilles and their natural market in the United States led to the adoption in January last of a commercial agreement looking to that end. This agreement has since been superseded by a more carefully framed and comprehensive convention which I shall submit to the Senate for approval. It has been the aim of this negotiation to open such a favored reciprocal exchange of productions carried under the flag of either country as to make the intercourse between Cuba and Puerto Rico and ourselves scarcely less intimate than the commercial movement between our domestic ports and to insure a removal of the burdens on shipping in the Spanish Indies of which in the past our shipowners and shipmasters have so often had cause to complain. The negotiation of this convention has for a time postponed the prosecution of certain claims of our citizens which were declared to be without the jurisdiction of the late Spanish-American Claims Commission and which are therefore remitted to diplomatic channels for adjustment. The speedy settlement of these claims will now be urged by this Government. Negotiations for a treaty of commercial reciprocity with the Dominican Republic have been successfully concluded and the result will shortly be laid before the Senate. Certain questions between the United States and the Ottoman Empire still remain unsolved. Complaints on behalf of our citizens are not satisfactorily adjusted. The Porte has sought to withhold from our commerce the right of favored treatment to which we are entitled by existing conventional stipulations and the revision of the tariffs is unaccomplished. The final disposition of pending questions with Venezuela has not as yet been reached but I have good reason to expect an early settlement which will provide the means of reexamining the Caracas awards in conformity with the expressed desire of Congress and which will recognize the justice of certain claims preferred against Venezuela. The Central and South American Commission appointed by authority of the act of July 7 1884 will soon proceed to Mexico. It has been furnished with instructions which will be laid before you. They contain a statement of the general policy of the Government for enlarging its commercial intercourse with American States. The commissioners have been actively preparing for their responsible task by holding conferences in the principal cities with merchants and others interested in Central and South American trade. The International Meridian Conference lately convened in Washington upon the invitation of the Government of the United States was composed of representatives from twenty-five nations. The conference concluded its labors on the 1st of November having with substantial unanimity agreed upon the meridian of Greenwich as the starting point whence longitude is to be computed through 180 degrees eastward and westward and upon the adoption for all purposes for which it may be found convenient of a universal day which shall begin at midnight on the initial meridian and whose hours shall be counted from zero up to twenty-four. The formal report of the transactions of this conference will be hereafter transmitted to the Congress. This Government is in frequent receipt of invitations from foreign states to participate in international exhibitions often of great interest and importance. Occupying as we do an advanced position in the world's production and aiming to secure a profitable share for our industries in the general competitive markets it is a matter of serious concern that the want of means for participation in these exhibitions should so often exclude our producers from advantages enjoyed by those of other countries. During the past year the attention of Congress was drawn to the formal invitations in this regard tendered by the Governments of England Holland Belgium Germany and Austria. The Executive has in some instances appointed honorary commissioners. This is however a most unsatisfactory expedient for without some provision to meet the necessary working expenses of a commission it can effect little or nothing in behalf of exhibitors. An International Inventions Exhibition is to be held in London next May. This will cover a field of special importance in which our country holds a foremost rank; but the Executive is at present powerless to organize a proper representation of our vast national interests in this direction. I have in several previous messages referred to this subject. It seems to me that a statute giving to the Executive general discretionary authority to accept such invitations and to appoint honorary commissioners without salary and placing at the disposal of the Secretary of State a small fund for defraying their reasonable expenses would be of great public utility. This Government has received official notice that the revised international regulations for preventing collisions at sea have been adopted by all the leading maritime powers except the United States and came into force on the 1st of September last. For the due protection of our shipping interests the provisions of our statutes should at once be brought into conformity with these regulations. The question of securing to authors composers and artists copyright privileges in this country in return for reciprocal rights abroad is one that may justly challenge your attention. It is true that conventions will be necessary for fully accomplishing this result; but until Congress shall by statute fix the extent to which foreign holders of copyright shall be here privileged it has been deemed inadvisable to negotiate such conventions. For this reason the United States were not represented at the recent conference at Berne. I recommend that the scope of the neutrality laws of the United States be so enlarged as to cover all patent acts of hostility committed in our territory and aimed against the peace of a friendly nation. Existing statutes prohibit the fitting out of armed expeditions and restrict the shipment of explosives though the enactments in the latter respect were not framed with regard to international obligations but simply for the protection of passenger travel. All these statutes were intended to meet special emergencies that had already arisen. Other emergencies have arisen since and modern ingenuity supplies means for the organization of hostilities without open resort to armed vessels or to filibustering parties. I see no reason why overt preparations in this country for the commission of criminal acts such as are here under consideration should not be alike punishable whether such acts are intended to be committed in our own country or in a foreign country with which we are at peace. The prompt and thorough treatment of this question is one which intimately concerns the national honor. Our existing naturalization laws also need revision. Those sections relating to persons residing within the limits of the United States in 1795 and 1798 have now only a historical interest. Section 2172 recognizing the citizenship of the children of naturalized parents is ambiguous in its terms and partly obsolete. There are special provisions of law favoring the naturalization of those who serve in the Army or in merchant vessels while no similar privileges are granted those who serve in the Navy or the Marine Corps. "An uniform rule of naturalization" such as the Constitution contemplates should among other things clearly define the status of persons born within the United States subject to a foreign power (section 1992) and of minor children of fathers who have declared their intention to become citizens but have failed to perfect their naturalization. It might be wise to provide for a central bureau of registry wherein should be filed authenticated transcripts of every record of naturalization in the several Federal and State courts and to make provision also for the vacation or cancellation of such record in cases where fraud had been practiced upon the court by the applicant himself or where he had renounced or forfeited his acquired citizenship. A just and uniform law in this respect would strengthen the hands of the Government in protecting its citizens abroad and would pave the way for the conclusion of treaties of naturalization with foreign countries. The legislation of the last session effected in the diplomatic and consular service certain changes and reductions which have been productive of embarrassment. The population and commercial activity of our country are steadily on the increase and are giving rise to new varying and often delicate relationships with other countries. Our foreign establishment now embraces nearly double the area of operations that it occupied twenty years ago. The confinement of such a service within the limits of expenditure then established is not it seems to me in accordance with true economy. A community of 60000000 people should be adequately represented in its intercourse with foreign nations. A project for the reorganization of the consular service and for recasting the scheme of extraterritorial jurisdiction is now before you. If the limits of a short session will not allow of its full consideration I trust that you will not fail to make suitable provision for the present needs of the service. It has been customary to define in the appropriation acts the rank of each diplomatic office to which a salary is attached. I suggest that this course be abandoned and that it be left to the President with the advice and consent Of the Senate to fix from time to time the diplomatic grade of the representatives of this Government abroad as may seem advisable provision being definitely made however as now for the amount of salary attached to the respective stations. The condition of our finances and the operations of the various branches of the public service which are connected with the Treasury Department are very fully discussed in the report of the Secretary. It appears that the ordinary revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30 1884 were: From customs $195067489.76 From internal revenue 121586072.51 From all other sources 31866307.65 Total ordinary revenues 348519869.92 The public expenditures during the same period were: For civil expenses $22312907.71 For foreign intercourse 1260766.37 For Indians 6475999.29 For pensions 55429228.06 For the military establishment including river and harbor improvements and arsenals 39429603.36 For the naval establishment including vessels machinery and improvements at navy-yards 17292601.44 For miscellaneous expenditures including public buildings light-houses and collecting the revenue 43939710.00 For expenditures on account of the District of Columbia 3407049.62 For interest on the public debt 54578378.48 For the sinking fund 46790229.50 Total ordinary expenditures 290926473.83 Leaving a surplus of 57603396.09 As compared with the preceding fiscal year there was a net decrease of over $21000000 in the amount of expenditures. The aggregate receipts were less than those of the year previous by about $54000000. The falling off in revenue from customs made up nearly $20000000 of this deficiency and about $23000000 of the remainder was due to the diminished receipts from internal taxation. The Secretary estimates the total receipts for the fiscal year which will end June 30 1885 at $330000000 and the total expenditures at $290620201.16 in which sum are included the interest on the debt and the amount payable to the sinking fund. This would leave a surplus for the entire year of about $39000000. The value of exports from the United States to foreign countries during the year ending June 30 1884 was as follows: Domestic merchandise $724964852 Foreign merchandise 15548757 Total merchandise 740513609 Specie 67133383 Total exports of merchandise and specie 807646992 The cotton and cotton manufactures included in this statement were valued at $208900415; the breadstuffs at $162544715; the provisions at $114416547 and the mineral oils at $47103248. During the same period the imports were as follows: Merchandise $667697693 Gold and silver 37426262 Total 705123955 More than 63 per cent of the entire value of imported merchandise consisted of the following articles: Sugar and molasses $103884274 Wool and woolen manufactures 53842292 Silk and its manufactures 49949128 Coffee 49686705 Iron and steel and manufactures thereof 41464599 Chemicals 38464965 Flax hemp jute and like substances and manufactures thereof 33463398 Cotton and manufactures of cotton 30454476 Hides and skins other than fur skins 22350906 I concur with the Secretary of the Treasury in recommending the immediate suspension of the coinage of silver dollars and of the issuance of silver certificates. This is a matter to which in former communications I have more than once invoked the attention of the National Legislature. It appears that annually for the past six years there have been coined in Compliance with the requirements of the act of February 28 1878 more than 27000000 silver dollars. The number now outstanding is reported by the Secretary to be nearly 185000000 whereof but little more than 40000000 or less than 22 per cent are in actual circulation. The mere existence of this fact seems to me to furnish of itself a cogent argument for the repeal of the statute which has made such fact possible. But there are other and graver considerations that tend in the same direction. The Secretary avows his conviction that unless this coinage and the issuance of silver certificates be suspended silver is likely at no distant day to become our sole metallic standard. The commercial disturbance and the impairment of national credit that would be thus occasioned can scarcely be overestimated. I hope that the Secretary's suggestions respecting the withdrawal from circulation of the $1 and $2 notes will receive your approval. It is likely that a considerable portion of the silver now encumbering the vaults of the Treasury might thus find its way into the currency. While trade dollars have ceased for the present at least to be an element of active disturbance in our currency system some provision should be made for their surrender to the Government. In view of the circumstances under which they were coined and of the fact that they have never had a legal-tender quality there should be offered for them only a slight advance over their bullion value. The Secretary in the course of his report considers the propriety of beautifying the designs of our subsidiary silver coins and of so increasing their weight that they may bear their due ratio of value to the standard dollar. His conclusions in this regard are cordially approved. In my annual message of 1882 I recommended the abolition of all excise taxes except those relating to distilled spirits. This recommendation is now renewed. In case these taxes shall be abolished the revenues that will still remain to the Government will in my opinion not only suffice to meet its reasonable expenditures but will afford a surplus large enough to permit such tariff reduction as may seem to be advisable when the results of recent revenue laws and commercial treaties shall have shown in what quarters those reductions can be most judiciously effected. One of the gravest of the problems which appeal to the wisdom of Congress for solution is the ascertainment of the most effective means for increasing our foreign trade and thus relieving the depression under which our industries are now languishing. The Secretary of the Treasury advises that the duty of investigating this subject be intrusted in the first instance to a competent commission. While fully recognizing the considerations that may be urged against this course I am nevertheless of the opinion that upon the whole no other would be likely to effect speedier or better results. That portion of the Secretary's report which concerns the condition of our shipping interests can not fail to command your attention. He emphatically recommends that as an incentive to the investment of American capital in American steamships the Government shall by liberal payments for mail transportation or otherwise lend its active assistance to individual enterprise and declares his belief that unless that course be pursued our foreign carrying trade must remain as it is to-day almost exclusively in the hands of foreigners. One phase of this subject is now especially prominent in view of the repeal by the act of June 26 1884 of all statutory provisions arbitrarily compelling American vessels to carry the mails to and from the United States. As it is necessary to make provision to compensate the owners of such vessels for performing that service after April 1885 it is hoped that the whole subject will receive early consideration that will lead to the enactment of such measures for the revival of our merchant marine as the wisdom of Congress may devise The 3 per cent bonds of the Government to the amount of more than $100000000 have since my last annual message been redeemed by the Treasury. The bonds of that issue still outstanding amount to little over $200000000 about one-fourth of which will be retired through the operations of the sinking fund during the coming year. As these bonds still constitute the chief basis for the circulation of the national banks the question how to avert the contraction of the currency caused by their retirement is one of constantly increasing importance. It seems to be generally conceded that the law governing this matter exacts from the banks excessive security and that upon their present bond deposits a larger circulation than is now allowed may be granted with safety. I hope that the bill which passed the Senate at the last session permitting the issue of notes equal to the face value of the deposited bonds will commend itself to the approval of the House of Representatives. In the expenses of the War Department the Secretary reports a decrease of more than $9000000. Of this reduction $5600000 was effected in the expenditures for rivers and harbors and $2700000 in expenditures for the Quartermaster's Department. Outside of that Department the annual expenses of all the Army bureaus proper (except possibly the Ordnance Bureau) are substantially fixed charges which can not be materially diminished without a change in the numerical strength of the Army. The expenditures in the Quartermaster's Department can readily be subjected to administrative discretion and it is reported by the Secretary of War that as a result of exercising such discretion in reducing the number of draft and pack animals in the Army the annual cost of supplying and caring for such animals is now $1108085.90 less than it was in 1881. The reports of military commanders show that the last year has been notable for its entire freedom from Indian outbreaks. In defiance of the President's proclamation of July 1 1884 certain intruders sought to make settlements in the Indian Territory. They were promptly removed by a detachment of troops. During the past session of Congress a bill to provide a suitable fire-proof building for the Army Medical Museum and the library of the Surgeon-General's Office received the approval of the Senate. A similar bill reported favorably to the House of Representatives by one of its committees is still pending before that body. It is hoped that during the coming session the measure may become a law and that thereafter immediate steps may be taken to secure a place of safe deposit for these valuable collections now in a state of insecurity. The funds with which the works for the improvement of rivers and harbors were prosecuted during the past year were derived from the appropriations of the act of August 2 1882 together with such few balances as were on hand from previous appropriations. The balance in the Treasury subject to requisition July 1 1883 was $10021649.55. The amount appropriated during the fiscal year 1884 was $1319634.62 and the amount drawn from the Treasury during the fiscal year was $8228703.54 leaving a balance of $3112580.63 in the Treasury subject to requisition July 1 1884. The Secretary of War submits the report of the Chief of Engineers as to the practicability of protecting our important cities on the seaboard by fortifications and other defenses able to repel modern methods of attack. The time has now come when such defenses can be prepared with confidence that they will not prove abortive and when the possible result of delay in making such preparation is seriously considered delay seems inexcusable. For the most important cities--those whose destruction or capture would be a national humiliation--adequate defenses inclusive of guns may be made by the gradual expenditure of $60000000--a sum much less than a victorious enemy could levy as a contribution. An appropriation of about one-tenth of that amount is asked to begin the work and I concur with the Secretary of War in urging that it be granted. The War Department is proceeding with the conversion of 10-inch smoothbore guns into 8-inch rifles by lining the former with
