To the Congress of the United States: As you assemble for the discharge of the duties you have assumed as the representatives of a free and generous people your meeting is marked by an interesting and impressive incident. With the expiration of the present session of the Congress the first century of our constitutional existence as a nation will be completed. Our survival for one hundred years is not sufficient to assure us that we no longer have dangers to fear in the maintenance with all its promised blessings of a government rounded upon the freedom of the people. The time rather admonishes us to soberly inquire whether in the past we have always closely kept in the course of safety and whether we have before us a way plain and clear which leads to happiness and perpetuity. When the experiment of our Government was undertaken the chart adopted for our guidance was the Constitution. Departure from the lines there laid down is failure. It is only by a strict adherence to the direction they indicate and by restraint within the limitations they fix that we can furnish proof to the world of the fitness of the American people for self-government. The equal and exact justice of which we boast as the underlying principle of our institutions should not be confined to the relations of our citizens to each other. The Government itself is under bond to the American people that in the exercise of its functions and powers it will deal with the body of our citizens in a manner scrupulously honest and fair and absolutely just. It has agreed that American citizenship shall be the only credential necessary to justify the claim of equality before the law and that no condition in life shall give rise to discrimination in the treatment of the people by their Government. The citizen of our Republic in its early days rigidly insisted upon full compliance with the letter of this bond and saw stretching out before him a clear field for individual endeavor. His tribute to the support of his Government was measured by the cost of its economical maintenance and he was secure in the enjoyment of the remaining recompense of his steady and contented toil. In those days the frugality of the people was stamped upon their Government and was enforced by the free thoughtful and intelligent suffrage of the citizen. Combinations monopolies and aggregations of capital were either avoided or sternly regulated and restrained. The pomp and glitter of governments less free offered no temptation and presented no delusion to the plain people who side by side in friendly competition wrought for the ennoblement and dignity of man for the solution of the problem of free government and for the achievement of the grand destiny awaiting the land which God had given them. A century has passed. Our cities are the abiding places of wealth and luxury; our manufactories yield fortunes never dreamed of by the fathers of the Republic; our business men are madly striving in the race for riches and immense aggregations of capital outrun the imagination in the magnitude of their undertakings. We view with pride and satisfaction this bright picture of our country's growth and prosperity while only a closer scrutiny develops a somber shading. Upon more careful inspection we find the wealth and luxury of our cities mingled with poverty and wretchedness and unremunerative toil. A crowded and constantly increasing urban population suggests the impoverishment of rural sections and discontent with agricultural pursuits. The farmer's son not satisfied with his father's simple and laborious life joins the eager chase for easily acquired wealth. We discover that the fortunes realized by our manufacturers are no longer solely the reward of sturdy industry and enlightened foresight but that they result from the discriminating favor of the Government and are largely built upon undue exactions from the masses of our people. The gulf between employers and the employed is constantly widening and classes are rapidly forming one comprising the very rich and powerful while in another are found the toiling poor. As we view the achievements of aggregated capital we discover the existence of trusts combinations and monopolies while the citizen is struggling far in the rear or is trampled to death beneath an iron heel. Corporations which should be the carefully restrained creatures of the law and the servants of the people are fast becoming the people's masters. Still congratulating ourselves upon the wealth and prosperity of our country and complacently contemplating every incident of change inseparable from these conditions it is our duty as patriotic citizens to inquire at the present stage of our progress how the bond of the Government made with the people has been kept and performed. Instead of limiting the tribute drawn from our citizens to the necessities of its economical administration the Government persists in exacting from the substance of the people millions which unapplied and useless lie dormant in its Treasury. This flagrant injustice and this breach of faith and obligation add to extortion the danger attending the diversion of the currency of the country from the legitimate channels of business. Under the same laws by which these results are produced the Government permits many millions more to be added to the cost of the living of our people and to be taken from our consumers which unreasonably swell the profits of a small but powerful minority. The people must still be taxed for the support of the Government under the operation of tariff laws. But to the extent that the mass of our citizens are inordinately burdened beyond any useful public purpose and for the benefit of a favored few the Government under pretext of an exercise of its taxing power enters gratuitously into partnership with these favorites to their advantage and to the injury of a vast majority of our people. This is not equality before the law. The existing situation is injurious to the health of our entire body politic. It stifles in those for whose benefit it is permitted all patriotic love of country and substitutes in its place selfish greed and grasping avarice. Devotion to American citizenship for its own sake and for what it should accomplish as a motive to our nation's advancement and the happiness of all our people is displaced by the assumption that the Government instead of being the embodiment of equality is but an instrumentality through which especial and individual advantages are to be gained. The arrogance of this assumption is unconcealed. It appears in the sordid disregard of all but personal interests in the refusal to abate for the benefit of others one iota of selfish advantage and in combinations to perpetuate such advantages through efforts to control legislation and improperly influence the suffrages of the people. The grievances of those not included within the circle of these beneficiaries when fully realized will surely arouse irritation and discontent. Our farmers long suffering and patient struggling in the race of life with the hardest and most unremitting toil will not fail to see in spite of misrepresentations and misleading fallacies that they are obliged to accept such prices for their products as are fixed in foreign markets where they compete with the farmers of the world; that their lands are declining in value while their debts increase and that without compensating favor they are forced by the action of the Government to pay for the benefit of others such enhanced prices for the things they need that the scanty returns of their labor fail to furnish their support or leave no margin for accumulation. Our workingmen enfranchised from all delusions and no longer frightened by the cry that their wages are endangered by a just revision of our tariff laws will reasonably demand through such revision steadier employment cheaper means of living in their homes freedom for themselves and their children from the doom of perpetual servitude and an open door to their advancement beyond the limits of a laboring class. Others of our citizens whose comforts and expenditures are measured by moderate salaries and fixed incomes will insist upon the fairness and justice of cheapening the cost of necessaries for themselves and their families. When to the selfishness of the beneficiaries of unjust discrimination under our laws there shall be added the discontent of those who suffer from such discrimination we will realize the fact that the beneficent purposes of our Government dependent upon the patriotism and contentment of our people are endangered. Communism is a hateful thing and a menace to peace and organized government; but the communism of combined wealth and capital the outgrowth of overweening cupidity and selfishness which insidiously undermines the justice and integrity of free institutions is not less dangerous than the communism of oppressed poverty and toil which exasperated by injustice and discontent attacks with wild disorder the citadel of rule. He mocks the people who proposes that the Government shall protect the rich and that they in turn will care for the laboring poor. Any intermediary between the people and their Government or the least delegation of the care and protection the Government owes to the humblest citizen in the land makes the boast of free institutions a glittering delusion and the pretended boon of American citizenship a shameless imposition. A just and sensible revision of our tariff laws should be made for the relief of those of our countrymen who suffer under present conditions. Such a revision should receive the support of all who love that justice and equality due to American citizenship; of all who realize that in this justice and equality our Government finds its strength and its power to protect the citizen and his property; of all who believe that the contented competence and comfort of many accord better with the spirit of our institutions than colossal fortunes unfairly gathered in the hands of a few; of all who appreciate that the forbearance and fraternity among our people which recognize the value of every American interest are the surest guaranty of our national progress and of all who desire to see the products of American skill and ingenuity in every market of the world with a resulting restoration of American commerce. The necessity of the reduction of our revenues is so apparent as to be generally conceded but the means by which this end shall be accomplished and the sum of direct benefit which shall result to our citizens present a controversy of the utmost importance. There should be no scheme accepted as satisfactory by which the burdens of the people are only apparently removed. Extravagant appropriations of public money with all their demoralizing consequences should not be tolerated either as a means of relieving the Treasury of its present surplus or as furnishing pretext for resisting a proper reduction in tariff rates. Existing evils and injustice should be honestly recognized boldly met and effectively remedied. There should be no cessation of the struggle until a plan is perfected fair and conservative toward existing industries but which will reduce the cost to consumers of the necessaries of life while it provides for our manufacturers the advantage of freer raw materials and permits no injury to the interests of American labor. The cause for which the battle is waged is comprised within lines clearly and distinctly defined. It should never be compromised. It is the people's cause. It can not be denied that the selfish and private interests which are so persistently heard when efforts are made to deal in a just and comprehensive manner with our tariff laws are related to if they are not responsible for the sentiment largely prevailing among the people that the General Government is the fountain of individual and private aid; that it may be expected to relieve with paternal care the distress of citizens and communities and that from the fullness of its Treasury it should upon the slightest possible pretext of promoting the general good apply public funds to the benefit of localities and individuals. Nor can it be denied that there is a growing assumption that as against the Government and in favor of private claims and interests the usual rules and limitations of business principles and just dealing should be waived. These ideas have been unhappily much encouraged by legislative acquiescence. Relief from contracts made with the Government is too easily accorded in favor of the citizen; the failure to support claims against the Government by proof is often supplied by no better consideration than the wealth of the Government and the poverty of the claimant; gratuities in the form of pensions are granted upon no other real ground than the needy condition of the applicant or for reasons less valid; and large sums are expended for public buildings and other improvements upon representations scarcely claimed to be related to public needs and necessities. The extent to which the consideration of such matters subordinate and postpone action upon subjects of great public importance but involving no special private or partisan interest should arrest attention and lead to reformation. A few of the numerous illustrations of this condition may be stated. The crowded condition of the calendar of the Supreme Court and the delay to suitors and denial of justice resulting therefrom has been strongly urged upon the attention of the Congress with a plan for the relief of the situation approved by those well able to judge of its merits. While this subject remains without effective consideration many laws have been passed providing for the holding of terms of inferior courts at places to suit the convenience of localities or to lay the foundation of an application for the erection of a new public building. Repeated recommendations have been submitted for the amendment and change of the laws relating to our public lands so that their spoliation and diversion to other uses than as homes for honest settlers might be prevented. While a measure to meet this conceded necessity of reform remains awaiting the action of the Congress many claims to the public lands and applications for their donation in favor of States and individuals have been allowed. A plan in aid of Indian management recommended by those well informed as containing valuable features in furtherance of the solution of the Indian problem has thus far failed of legislative sanction while grants of doubtful expediency to railroad corporations permitting them to pass through Indian reservations have greatly multiplied. The propriety and necessity of the erection of one or more prisons for the confinement of United States convicts and a post-office building in the national capital are not disputed. But these needs yet remain answered while scores of public buildings have been erected where their necessity for public purposes is not apparent. A revision of our pension laws could easily be made which would rest upon just principles and provide for every worthy applicant. But while our general pension laws remain confused and imperfect hundreds of private pension laws are annually passed which are the sources of unjust discrimination and popular demoralization. Appropriation bills for the support of the Government are defaced by items and provisions to meet private ends and it is freely asserted by responsible and experienced parties that a bill appropriating money for public internal improvement would fail to meet with favor unless it contained items more for local and private advantage than for public benefit. These statements can be much emphasized by an ascertainment of the proportion of Federal legislation which either bears upon its face its private character or which upon examination develops such a motive power. And yet the people wait and expect from their chosen representatives such patriotic action as will advance the welfare of the entire country; and this expectation can only be answered by the performance of public duty with unselfish purpose. Our mission among the nations of the earth and our success in accomplishing the work God has given the American people to do require of those intrusted with the making and execution of our laws perfect devotion above all other things to the public good. This devotion will lead us to strongly resist all impatience of constitutional limitations of Federal power and to persistently check the increasing tendency to extend the scope of Federal legislation into the domain of State and local jurisdiction upon the plea of subserving the public welfare. The preservation of the partitions between proper subjects of Federal and local care and regulation is of such importance under the Constitution which is the law of our very existence that no consideration of expediency or sentiment should tempt us to enter upon doubtful ground. We have undertaken to discover and proclaim the richest blessings of a free government with the Constitution as our guide. Let us follow the way it points out; it will not mislead us. And surely no one who has taken upon himself the solemn obligation to support and preserve the Constitution can find justification or solace for disloyalty in the excuse that he wandered and disobeyed in search of a better way to reach the public welfare than the Constitution offers. What has been said is deemed not inappropriate at a time when from a century's height we view the way already trod by the American people and attempt to discover their future path. The seventh President of the United States--the soldier and statesman and at all times the firm and brave friend of the people--in vindication of his course as the protector of popular rights and the champion of true American citizenship declared: The ambition which leads me on is an anxious desire and a fixed determination to restore to the people unimpaired the sacred trust they have confided to my charge; to heal the wounds of the Constitution and to preserve it from further violation; to persuade my countrymen so far as I may that it is not in a splendid government supported by powerful monopolies and aristocratical establishments that they will find happiness or their liberties protection but in a plain system void of pomp protecting all and granting favors to none dispensing its blessings like the dews of heaven unseen and unfelt save in the freshness and beauty they contribute to produce. It is such a government that the genius of our people requires--such an one only under which our States may remain for ages to come united prosperous and free. In pursuance of a constitutional provision requiring the President from time to time to give to the Congress information of the state of the Union I have the satisfaction to announce that the close of the year finds the United States in the enjoyment of domestic tranquillity and at peace with all the nations. Since my last annual message our foreign relations have been strengthened and improved by performance of international good offices and by new and renewed treaties of amity commerce and reciprocal extradition of criminals. Those international questions which still await settlement are all reasonably within the domain of amicable negotiation and there is no existing subject of dispute between the United States and any foreign power that is not susceptible of satisfactory adjustment by frank diplomatic treatment. The questions between Great Britain and the United States relating to the rights of American fishermen under treaty and international comity in the territorial waters of Canada and Newfoundland I regret to say are not yet satisfactorily adjusted. These matters were fully treated in my message to the Senate of February 20 1888 together with which a convention concluded under my authority with Her Majesty's Government on the 15th of February last for the removal of all causes of misunderstanding was submitted by me for the approval of the Senate. This treaty having been rejected by the Senate I transmitted a message to the Congress on the 23d of August last reviewing the transactions and submitting for consideration certain recommendations for legislation concerning the important questions involved. Afterwards on the 12th of September in response to a resolution of the Senate I again communicated fully all the information in my possession as to the action of the government of Canada affecting the commercial relations between the Dominion and the United States including the treatment of American fishing vessels in the ports and waters of British North America. These communications have all been published and therefore opened to the knowledge of both Houses of Congress although two were addressed to the Senate alone. Comment upon or repetition of their contents would be superfluous and I am not aware that anything has since occurred which should be added to the facts therein stated. Therefore I merely repeat as applicable to the present time the statement which will be found in my message to the Senate of September 12 last that-- Since March 3 1887 no case has been reported to the Department of State wherein complaint was made of unfriendly or unlawful treatment of American fishing vessels on the part of the Canadian authorities in which reparation was not promptly and satisfactorily obtained by the United States consul-general at Halifax. Having essayed in the discharge of my duty to procure by negotiation the settlement of a long-standing cause of dispute and to remove a constant menace to the good relations of the two countries and continuing to be of opinion that the treaty of February last which failed to receive the approval of the Senate did supply "a satisfactory practical and final adjustment upon a basis honorable and just to both parties of the difficult and vexed question to which it related" and having subsequently and unavailingly recommended other legislation to Congress which I hoped would suffice to meet the exigency created by the rejection of the treaty I now again invoke the earnest and immediate attention of the Congress to the condition of this important question as it now stands before them and the country and for the settlement of which I am deeply solicitous. Near the close of the month of October last occurrences of a deeply regrettable nature were brought to my knowledge which made it my painful but imperative duty to obtain with as little delay as possible a new personal channel of diplomatic intercourse in this country with the Government of Great Britain. The correspondence in relation to this incident will in due course be laid before you and will disclose the unpardonable conduct of the official referred to in his interference by advice and counsel with the suffrages of American citizens in the very crisis of the Presidential election then near at hand and also in his subsequent public declarations to justify his action superadding impugnment of the Executive and Senate of the United States in connection with important questions now pending in controversy between the two Governments. The offense thus committed was most grave involving disastrous possibilities to the good relations of the United States and Great Britain constituting a gross breach of diplomatic privilege and an invasion of the purely domestic affairs and essential sovereignty of the Government to which the envoy was accredited. Having first fulfilled the just demands of international comity by affording full opportunity for Her Majesty's Government to act in relief of the situation I considered prolongation of discussion to be unwarranted and thereupon declined to further recognize the diplomatic character of the person whose continuance in such function would destroy that mutual confidence which is essential to the good understanding of the two Governments and was inconsistent with the welfare and self-respect of the Government of the United States. The usual interchange of communication has since continued through Her Majesty's legation in this city. My endeavors to establish by international cooperation measures for the prevention of the extermination of fur seals in Bering Sea have not been relaxed and I have hopes of being enabled shortly to submit an effective and satisfactory conventional projet with the maritime powers for the approval of the Senate. The coastal boundary between our Alaskan possessions and British Columbia I regret to say has not received the attention demanded by its importance and which on several occasions heretofore I have had the honor to recommend to the Congress. The admitted impracticability if not impossibility of making an accurate and precise survey and demarcation of the boundary line as it is recited in the treaty with Russia under which Alaska was ceded to the United States renders it absolutely requisite for the prevention of international jurisdictional complications that adequate appropriation for a reconnoissance and survey to obtain proper knowledge of the locality and the geographical features of the boundary should be authorized by Congress with as little delay as possible. Knowledge to be only thus obtained is an essential prerequisite for negotiation for ascertaining a common boundary or as preliminary to any other mode of settlement. It is much to be desired that some agreement should be reached with Her Majesty's Government by which the damages to life and property on the Great Lakes may be alleviated by removing or humanely regulating the obstacles to reciprocal assistance to wrecked or stranded vessels. The act of June 19 1878 which offers to Canadian vessels free access to our inland waters in aid of wrecked or disabled vessels has not yet become effective through concurrent action by Canada. The due protection of our citizens of French origin or descent from claim of military service in the event of their returning to or visiting France has called forth correspondence which was laid before you at the last session. In the absence of conventional agreement as to naturalization which is greatly to be desired this Government sees no occasion to recede from the sound position it has maintained not only with regard to France but as to all countries with which the United States have not concluded special treaties. Twice within the last year has the imperial household of Germany been visited by death; and I have hastened to express the sorrow of this people and their appreciation of the lofty character of the late aged Emperor William and their sympathy with the heroism under suffering of his son the late Emperor Frederick. I renew my recommendation of two years ago for the passage of a bill for the refunding to certain German steamship lines of the interest upon tonnage dues illegally exacted. On the 12th [2d] of April last I laid before the House of Representatives full information respecting our interests in Samoa; and in the subsequent correspondence on the same subject which will be laid before you in due course the history of events in those islands will be found. In a message accompanying my approval on the 1st day of October last of a bill for the exclusion of Chinese laborers I laid before Congress full information and all correspondence touching the negotiation of the treaty with China concluded at this capital on the 12th day of March 1888 and which having been confirmed by the Senate with certain amendments was rejected by the Chinese Government. This message contained a recommendation that a sum of money be appropriated as compensation to Chinese subjects who had suffered injuries at the hands of lawless men within our jurisdiction. Such appropriation having been duly made the fund awaits reception by the Chinese Government. It is sincerely hoped that by the cessation of the influx of this class of Chinese subjects in accordance with the expressed wish of both Governments a cause of unkind feeling has been permanently removed. On the 9th of August 1887 notification was given by the Japanese minister at this capital of the adjournment of the conference for the revision of the treaties of Japan with foreign powers owing to the objection of his Government to the provision in the draft jurisdictional convention which required the submission of the criminal code of the Empire to the powers in advance of its becoming operative. This notification was however accompanied with an assurance of Japan's intention to continue the work of revision. Notwithstanding this temporary interruption of negotiations it is hoped that improvements may soon be secured in the jurisdictional system as respects foreigners in Japan and relief afforded to that country from the present undue and oppressive foreign control in matters of commerce. I earnestly recommend that relief be provided for the injuries accidentally caused to Japanese subjects in the island Ikisima by the target practice of one of our vessels. A diplomatic mission from Korea has been received and the formal intercourse between the two countries contemplated by the treaty of 1882 is now established. Legislative provision is hereby recommended to organize and equip consular courts in Korea. Persia has established diplomatic representation at this capital and has evinced very great interest in the enterprise and achievements of our citizens. I am therefore hopeful that beneficial commercial relations between the two countries may be brought about. I announce with sincere regret that Hayti has again become the theater of insurrection disorder and bloodshed. The titular government of president Saloman has been forcibly overthrown and he driven out of the country to France where he has since died. The tenure of power has been so unstable amid the war of factions that has ensued since the expulsion of President Saloman that no government constituted by the will of the Haytian people has been recognized as administering responsibly the affairs of that country. Our representative has been instructed to abstain from interference between the warring factions and a vessel of our Navy has been sent to Haytian waters to sustain our minister and for the protection of the persons and property of American citizens. Due precautions have been taken to enforce our neutrality laws and prevent our territory from becoming the base of military supplies for either of the warring factions. Under color of a blockade of which no reasonable notice had been given and which does not appear to have been efficiently maintained a seizure of vessels under the American flag has been reported and in consequence measures to prevent and redress any molestation of our innocent merchantmen have been adopted. Proclamation was duly made on the 9th day of November 1887 of the conventional extensions of the treaty of June 3 1875 with Hawaii under which relations of such special and beneficent intercourse have been created. In the vast field of Oriental commerce now unfolded from our Pacific borders no feature presents stronger recommendations for Congressional action than the establishment of communication by submarine telegraph with Honolulu. The geographical position of the Hawaiian group in relation to our Pacific States creates a natural interdependency and mutuality of interest which our present treaties were intended to foster and which make close communication a logical and commercial necessity. The wisdom of concluding a treaty of commercial reciprocity with Mexico has been heretofore stated in my messages to Congress and the lapse of time and growth of commerce with that close neighbor and sister Republic confirm the judgment so expressed. The precise relocation of our boundary line is needful and adequate appropriation is now recommended. It is with sincere satisfaction that I am enabled to advert to the spirit of good neighborhood and friendly cooperation and conciliation that has marked the correspondence and action of the Mexican authorities in their share of the task of maintaining law and order about the line of our common boundary. The long-pending boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Nicaragua was referred to my arbitration and by an award made on the 22d of March last the question has been finally settled to the expressed satisfaction of both of the parties in interest. The Empire of Brazil in abolishing the last vestige of slavery among Christian nations called forth the earnest congratulations of this Government in expression of the cordial sympathies of our people. The claims of nearly all other countries against Chile growing out of her late war with Bolivia and Pe
