To the Congress of the United States: The constitutional duty which requires the President from time to time to give to the Congress information of the state of the Union and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient is fittingly entered upon by commending to the Congress a careful examination of the detailed statements and well-supported recommendations contained in the reports of the heads of Departments who are chiefly charged with the executive work of the Government. In an effort to abridge this communication as much as is consistent with its purpose I shall supplement a brief reference to the contents of these departmental reports by the mention of such executive business and incidents as are not embraced therein and by such recommendations as appear to be at this particular time appropriate. While our foreign relations have not at all times during the past year been entirely free from perplexity no embarrassing situation remains that will not yield to the spirit of fairness and love of justice which joined with consistent firmness characterize a truly American foreign policy. My predecessor having accepted the office of arbitrator of the long-standing Missions boundary dispute tendered to the President by the Argentine Republic and Brazil it has been my agreeable duty to receive the special envoys commissioned by those States to lay before me evidence and arguments in behalf of their respective Governments. The outbreak of domestic hostilities in the Republic of Brazil found the United States alert to watch the interests of our citizens in that country with which we carry on important commerce. Several vessels of our new Navy are now and for some time have been stationed at Rio de Janeiro. The struggle being between the established Government which controls the machinery of administration and with which we maintain friendly relations and certain officers of the navy employing the vessels of their command in an attack upon the national capital and chief seaport and lacking as it does the elements of divided administration I have failed to see that the insurgents can reasonably claim recognition as belligerents. Thus far the position of our Government has been that of an attentive but impartial observer of the unfortunate conflict. Emphasizing our fixed policy of impartial neutrality in such a condition of affairs as now exists I deemed it necessary to disavow in a manner not to be misunderstood the unauthorized action of our late naval commander in those waters in saluting the revolted Brazilian admiral being indisposed to countenance an act calculated to give gratuitous sanction to the local insurrection. The convention between our Government and Chile having for its object the settlement and adjustment of the demand of the two countries against each other has been made effective by he organization of the claims commission provided for. The two Governments failing to agree upon the third member of the commission the good offices of the President of the Swiss Republic were invoked as provided in the treaty and the selection of the Swiss representative in this country to complete the organization was gratifying alike to the United States and Chile. The vexatious question of so-called legation asylum for offenders against the state and its laws was presented anew in Chile by the unauthorized action of the late United States minister in receiving into his official residence two persons who had just failed in an attempt at revolution and against whom criminal charges were pending growing out of a former abortive disturbance. The doctrine of asylum as applied to this case is not sanctioned by the best precedents and when allowed tends to encourage sedition and strife. Under no circumstances can the representatives of this Government be permitted under the ill-defined fiction of extraterritoriality to interrupt the administration of criminal justice in the countries to which they are accredited. A temperate demand having been made by the Chilean Government for the correction of this conduct in the instance mentioned the minister was instructed no longer to harbor the offenders. The legislation of last year known as the Geary law requiring the registration of all Chinese laborers entitled to residence in the United States and the deportation of all not complying with the provisions of the act within the time prescribed met with much opposition from Chinamen in this country. Acting upon the advice of eminent counsel that the law was unconstitutional the great mass of Chinese laborers pending judicial inquiry as to its validity in good faith declined to apply for the certificates required by its provisions. A test case upon proceeding by habeas corpus was brought before the Supreme Court and on May 15 1893 a decision was made by that tribunal sustaining the law. It is believed that under the recent amendment of the act extending the time for registration the Chinese laborers thereto entitled who desire to reside in this country will now avail themselves of the renewed privilege thus afforded of establishing by lawful procedure their right to remain and that thereby the necessity of enforced deportation may to a great degree be avoided. It has devolved upon the United States minister at Peking as dean of the diplomatic body and in the absence of a representative of Sweden and Norway to press upon the Chinese Government reparation for the recent murder of Swedish missionaries at Sung-pu. This question is of vital interest to all countries whose citizens engage in missionary work in the interior. By Article XII of the general act of Brussels signed July 2 1890 for the suppression of the slave trade and the restriction of certain injurious commerce in the Independent State of the Kongo and in the adjacent zone of central Africa the United States and the other signatory powers agreed to adopt appropriate means for the punishment of persons selling arms and ammunition to the natives and for the confiscation of the inhibited articles. It being the plain duty of this Government to aid in suppressing the nefarious traffic impairing as it does the praiseworthy and civilizing efforts now in progress in that region I recommend that an act be passed prohibiting the sale of arms and intoxicants to natives in the regulated zone by our citizens. Costa Rica has lately testified its friendliness by surrendering to the United States in the absence of a convention of extradition but upon duly submitted evidence of criminality a noted fugitive from justice. It is trusted that the negotiation of a treaty with that country to meet recurring cases of this kind will soon be accomplished. In my opinion treaties for reciprocal extradition should be concluded with all those countries with which the United States has not already conventional arrangements of that character. I have deemed it fitting to express to the Governments of Costa Rica and Colombia the kindly desire of the United States to see their pending boundary dispute finally closed by arbitration in conformity with the spirit of the treaty concluded between them some years ago. Our relations with the French Republic continue to be intimate and cordial. I sincerely hope that the extradition treaty with that country as amended by the Senate will soon be operative. While occasional questions affecting our naturalized citizens returning to the land of their birth have arisen in our intercourse with Germany our relations with that country continue satisfactory. The questions affecting our relations with Great Britain have been treated in a spirit of friendliness. Negotiations are in progress between the two Governments with a view to such concurrent action as will make the award and regulations agreed upon by the Bering Sea Tribunal of Arbitration practically effective and it is not doubted that Great Britain will cooperate freely with this country for the accomplishment of that purpose. The dispute growing out of the discriminating tolls imposed in the Welland Canal upon cargoes of cereals bound to and from the lake ports of the United States was adjusted by the substitution of a more equitable schedule of charges and my predecessor thereupon suspended his proclamation imposing discriminating tolls upon British transit through our canals. A request for additions to the list of extraditable offenses covered by the existing treaty between the two countries is under consideration. During the past year an American citizen employed in a subordinate commercial position in Hayti after suffering a protracted imprisonment on an unfounded charge of smuggling was finally liberated on judicial examination. Upon urgent representation to the Haytian Government a suitable indemnity was paid to the sufferer. By a law of Hayti a sailing vessel having discharged her cargo is refused clearance until the duties on such cargo have been paid. The hardship of this measure upon American shipowners who conduct the bulk of the carrying trade of that country has been insisted on with a view of securing the removal of this cause of complaint. Upon receiving authentic information of the firing upon an American mail steamer touching at the port of Amapala because her captain refused to deliver up a passenger in transit from Nicaragua to Guatemala upon demand of the military authorities of Honduras our minister to that country under instructions protested against the wanton act and demanded satisfaction. The Government of Honduras actuated by a sense of justice and in a spirit of the utmost friendship promptly disavowed the illegal conduct of its officers and expressed sincere regret for the occurrence. It is confidently anticipated that a satisfactory adjustment will soon be reached of the questions arising out of the seizure and use of American vessels by insurgents in Honduras and the subsequent denial by the successful Government of commercial privileges to those vessels on that account. A notable part of the southeasterly coast of Liberia between the Cavally and San Pedro rivers which for nearly half a century has been generally recognized as belonging to that Republic by cession and purchase has been claimed to be under the protectorate of France in virtue of agreements entered into by the native tribes over whom Liberia's control has not been well maintained. More recently negotiations between the Liberian representative and the French Government resulted in the signature at Paris of a treaty whereby as an adjustment certain Liberian territory is ceded to France. This convention at last advices had not been ratified by the Liberian Legislature and Executive. Feeling a sympathetic interest in the fortunes of the little Commonwealth the establishment and development of which were largely aided by the benevolence of our countrymen and which constitutes the only independently sovereign state on the west coast of Africa this Government has suggested to the French Government its earnest concern lest territorial impairment in Liberia should take place without her unconstrained consent. Our relations with Mexico continue to be of that close and friendly nature which should always characterize the intercourse of two neighboring republics. The work of relocating the monuments marking the boundary between the two countries from Paso del Norte to the Pacific is now nearly completed. The commission recently organized under the conventions of 1884 and 1889 it is expected will speedily settle disputes growing out of the shifting currents of the Rio Grande River east of E1 Paso. Nicaragua has recently passed through two revolutions the party at first successful having in turn been displaced by another. Our newly appointed minister by his timely good offices aided in a peaceful adjustment of the controversy involved in the first conflict. The large American interests established in that country in connection with the Nicaragua Canal were not molested. The canal company has unfortunately become financially seriously embarrassed but a generous treatment had been extended to it by the Government of Nicaragua. The United States are especially interested in the successful achievement of the vast undertaking this company has in charge. That it should be accomplished under distinctively American auspices and its enjoyment assured not only to the vessels of this country as a channel of communication between our Atlantic and Pacific sea-boards but to the ships of the world in the interests of civilization is a proposition which in my judgment does not admit of question. Guatemala has also been visited by the political vicissitudes which have afflicted her Central American neighbors but the dissolution of its Legislature and the proclamation of a dictatorship have been unattended with civil war. An extradition treaty with Norway has recently been exchanged and proclaimed. The extradition treaty with Russia signed in March 1887 and amended and confirmed by the Senate in February last was duly proclaimed last June. Led by a desire to compose differences and contribute to the restoration of order in Samoa which for some years previous had been the scene of conflicting foreign pretensions and native strife the United States departing from its policy consecrated by a century of observance entered four years ago into the treaty of Berlin thereby becoming jointly bound with England and Germany to establish and maintain Malietoa Laupepa as King of Samoa. The treaty provided for a foreign court of justice; a municipal council for the district of Apia with a foreign president thereof authorized to advise the King; a tribunal for the settlement of native and foreign land titles and a revenue system for the Kingdom. It entailed upon the three powers that part of the cost of the new Government not met by the revenue of the islands. Early in the life of this triple protectorate the native dissensions it was designed to quell revived. Rivals defied the authority of the new King refusing to pay taxes and demanding the election of a ruler by native suffrage. Mataafa an aspirant to the throne and a large number of his native adherents were in open rebellion on one of the islands. Quite lately at the request of the other powers and in fulfillment of its treaty obligation this Government agreed to unite in a joint military movement of such dimensions as would probably secure the surrender of the insurgents without bloodshed. The war ship Philadelphia was accordingly put under orders for Samoa but before she arrived the threatened conflict was precipitated by King Malietoa's attack upon the insurgent camp. Mataafa was defeated and a number of his men killed. The British and German naval vessels present subsequently secured the surrender of Mataafa and his adherents. The defeated chief and ten of his principal supporters were deported to a German island of the Marshall group where they are held as prisoners under the joint responsibility and cost of the three powers. This incident and the events leading up to it signally illustrate the impolicy of entangling alliances with foreign powers. More than fifteen years ago this Government preferred a claim against Spain in behalf of one of our citizens for property seized and confiscated in Cuba. In 1886 the claim was adjusted Spain agreeing to pay unconditionally as a fair indemnity $1500000. A respectful but earnest note was recently addressed to the Spanish Government insisting upon prompt fulfillment of its long-neglected obligation. Other claims preferred by the United States against Spain in behalf of American citizens for property confiscated in Cuba have been pending for many years. At the time Spain's title to the Caroline Islands was confirmed by arbitration that Government agreed that the rights which had been acquired there by American missionaries should be recognized and respected. It is sincerely hoped that this pledge will be observed by allowing our missionaries who were removed from Ponape to a place of safety by a United States war ship during the late troubles between the Spanish garrison and the natives to return to their field of usefulness. The reproduced caravel Santa Maria built by Spain and sent to the Columbian Exposition has been presented to the United States in token of amity and in commemoration of the event it was designed to celebrate. I recommend that in accepting this gift Congress make grateful recognition of the sincere friendship which prompted it. Important matters have demanded attention in our relations with the Ottoman Porte. The firing and partial destruction by an unrestrained mob of one of the school buildings of Anatolia College established by citizens of the United States at Marsovan and the apparent indifference of the Turkish Government to the outrage notwithstanding the complicity of some of its officials called for earnest remonstrance which was followed by promise of reparation and punishment of the offenders. Indemnity for the injury to the buildings has already been paid permission to rebuild given registration of the school property in the name of the American owners secured and efficient protection guaranteed. Information received of maltreatment suffered by an inoffensive American woman engaged in missionary work in Turkish Koordistan was followed by such representations to the Porte as resulted in the issuance of orders for the punishment of her assailants the removal of a delinquent official and the adoption of measures for the protection of our citizens engaged in mission and other lawful work in that quarter. Turkey complains that her Armenian subjects obtain citizenship in this country not to identify themselves in good faith with our people but with the intention of returning to the land of their birth and there engaging in sedition. This complaint is not wholly without foundation. A journal published in this country in the Armenian language openly counsels its readers to arm organize and participate in movements for the subversion of Turkish authority in the Asiatic provinces. The Ottoman Government has announced its intention to expel from its dominions Armenians who have obtained naturalization in the United States since 1868. The right to exclude any or all classes of aliens is an attribute of sovereignty. It is a right asserted and to a limited extent enforced by the United States with the sanction of our highest court. There being no naturalization treaty between the United States and Turkey our minister at Constantinople has been instructed that while recognizing the right of that Government to enforce its declared policy against naturalized Armenians he is expected to protect them from unnecessary harshness of treatment. In view of the impaired financial resources of Venezuela consequent upon the recent revolution there a modified arrangement for the satisfaction of the awards of the late revisory claims commission in progressive installments has been assented to and payments are being regularly made thereunder. The boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana is yet unadjusted. A restoration of diplomatic intercourse between that Republic and Great Britain and reference of the question to impartial arbitration would be a most gratifying consummation. The ratification by Venezuela of the convention for the arbitration of the long-deferred claim of the Venezuelan Transportation Company is awaited. It is hardly necessary for me to state that the questions arising from our relations with Hawaii have caused serious embarrassment. Just prior to the installation of the present Administration the existing Government of Hawaii had been suddenly overthrown and a treaty of annexation had been negotiated between the Provisional Government of the islands and the United States and submitted to the Senate for ratification. This treaty I withdrew for examination and dispatched Hon. James H. Blount of Georgia to Honolulu as a special commissioner to make an impartial investigation of the circumstances attending the change of government and of all the conditions bearing upon the subject of the treaty. After a thorough and exhaustive examination Mr. Blount submitted to me his report showing beyond all question that the constitutional Government of Hawaii had been subverted with the active aid of our representative to that Government and through the intimidation caused by the presence of an armed naval force of the United States which was landed for that purpose at the instance of our minister. Upon the facts developed it seemed to me the only honorable course for our Government to pursue was to undo the wrong that had been done by those representing us and to restore as far as practicable the status existing at the time of our forcible intervention. With a view of accomplishing this result within the constitutional limits of executive power and recognizing all our obligations and responsibilities growing out of any changed conditions brought about by our unjustifiable interference our present minister at Honolulu has received appropriate instructions to that end. Thus far no information of the accomplishment of any definite results has been received from him. Additional advices are soon expected. When received they will be promptly sent to the Congress together with all other information at hand accompanied by a special Executive message fully detailing all the facts necessary to a complete understanding of the case and presenting a history of all the material events leading up to the present situation. By a concurrent resolution passed by the Senate February 14 1890 and by the House of Representatives on the 3d of April following the President was requested to "invite from time to time as fit occasions may arise negotiations with any government with which the United States has or may have diplomatic relations to the end that any differences or disputes arising between the two governments which can not be adjusted by diplomatic agency may be referred to arbitration and be peaceably adjusted by such means." April 18 1890 the International American Conference of Washington by resolution expressed the wish that all controversies between the republics of America and the nations of Europe might be settled by arbitration and recommended that the government of each nation represented in that conference should communicate this wish to all friendly powers. A favorable response has been received from Great Britain in the shape of a resolution adopted by Parliament July 16 last cordially sympathizing with the purpose in view and expressing the hope that Her Majesty's Government will lend ready cooperation to the Government of the United States upon the basis of the concurrent resolution above quoted. It affords me signal pleasure to lay this parliamentary resolution before the Congress and to express my sincere gratification that the sentiment of two great and kindred nations is thus authoritatively manifested in favor of the rational and peaceable settlement of international quarrels by honorable resort to arbitration. Since the-passage of the act of March 3 1893 authorizing the President to raise the grade of our envoys to correspond with the rank in which foreign countries accredit their agents here Great Britain France Italy and Germany have conferred upon their representatives at this capital the title of ambassador and I have responded by accrediting the agents of the United States in those countries with the same title. A like elevation of mission is announced by Russia and when made will be similarly met. This step fittingly comports with the position the United States hold in the family of nations. During my former Administration I took occasion to recommend a recast of the laws relating to the consular service in order that it might become a more efficient agency in the promotion of the interests it was intended to subserve. The duties and powers of consuls have been expanded with the growing requirements of our foreign trade. Discharging important duties affecting our commerce and American citizens abroad and in certain countries exercising judicial functions these officers should be men of character intelligence and ability. Upon proof that the legislation of Denmark secures copyright to American citizens on equal footing with its own the privileges of our copyright laws have been extended by proclamation to subjects of that country. The Secretary of the Treasury reports that the receipts of the Government from all sources during the fiscal year ended June 30 1893 amounted to $461716561.94 and its expenditures to $459374674.29. There was collected from customs $205355016.73 and from internal revenue $161027623.93. Our dutiable imports amounted to $421856711 an increase of $52453907 over the preceding year and importations free of duty amounted to $444544211 a decrease from the preceding year of $13455447. Internal-revenue receipts exceeded those of the preceding year by $7147445.32. The total tax collected on distilled spirits was $94720260.55 on manufactured tobacco $31889711.74 and on fermented liquors $32548983.07. We exported merchandise during the year amounting to $847665194 a decrease of $182612954 from the preceding year. The amount of gold exported was larger than any previous year in the history of the Government amounting to $108680844 and exceeding the amount exported during the preceding year by$58485517. The sum paid from the Treasury for sugar bounty was $9375130.88 an increase over the preceding year of $2033053.09. It is estimated upon the basis of present revenue laws that the receipts of the Government for the year ending June 30 1894 will be $430121365.38 and its expenditures $458121365.28 resulting in a deficiency of $28000000. On the 1st day of November 1893 the amount of money of all kinds in circulation or not included in Treasury holdings was $1718544682 an increase for the year of $112404947. Estimating our population at 67426000 at the time mentioned the per capita circulation was $25.49. On the same date there was in the Treasury gold bullion amounting to $96657273 and silver bullion which was purchased at a cost of $126261553. The purchases of silver under the law of July 14 1890 during the last fiscal year aggregated 54008162.59 fine ounces which cost $45531374.53. The total amount of silver purchased from the time that law became operative until the repeal of its purchasing clause on the 1st day of November 1893 was 168674590.46 fine ounces which cost $155930940.84. Between the 1st day of March 1873 and the 1st day of November 1893 the Government purchased under all laws 503003717 fine ounces of silver at a cost of $516622948. The silver dollars that have been coined under the act of July 14 1890 number 36087285. The seigniorage arising from such coinage was $6977098.39 leaving on hand in the mints 140699760 fine ounces of silver which cost $126758218. Our total coinage of all metals during the last fiscal year consisted of 97280875 pieces valued at $43685178.80 of which there was $30038140 in gold coin $5343715 in silver dollars $7217220.90 in subsidiary silver coin and $1086102.90 in minor coins. During the calendar year 1892 the production of precious metals in the United States was estimated to be 1596375 fine ounces of gold of the commercial and coinage value of $33000000 and 58000000 fine ounces of silver of the bullion or market value of $50750000 and of the coinage value of $74989900. It is estimated that on the 1st day of July 1893 the metallic stock of money in the United States consisting of coin and bullion amounted to $1213559169 of which $597697685 was gold and $615861484 was silver. One hundred and nineteen national banks were organized during the year ending October 31 1893 with a capital of $11230000. Forty-six went into voluntary liquidation and 158 suspended. Sixty-five of the suspended banks were insolvent 86 resumed business and 7 remain in the hands of the bank examiners with prospects of speedy resumption. Of the new banks organized 44 were located in the Eastern States 41 west of the Mississippi River and 34 in the Central and Southern States. The total number of national banks in existence on October 31 1893 was 3796 having an aggregate capital of $695558120. The net increase in the circulation of these banks during the year was $36886972. The recent repeal of the provision of law requiring the purchase of silver bullion by the Government as a feature of our monetary scheme has made an entire change in the complexion of our currency affairs. I do not doubt that the ultimate result of this action will be most salutary and far-reaching. In the nature of things however it is impossible to know at this time precisely what conditions will be brought about by the change or what if any supplementary legislation may in the light of such conditions appear to be essential or expedient. Of course after the recent financial perturbation time is necessary for the reestablishment of business confidence. When however through this restored confidence the money which has been frightened into hoarding places is returned to trade and enterprise a survey of the situation will probably disclose a safe path leading to a permanently sound currency abundantly sufficient to meet every requirement of our increasing population and business. In the pursuit of this object we should resolutely turn away from alluring and temporary expedients determined to be content with nothing less than a lasting and comprehensive financial plan. In these circumstances I am convinced that a reasonable delay in dealing with this subject instead of being injurious will increase the probability of wise action. The monetary conference which assembled at Brussels upon our invitation was adjourned to the 30th day of November of the present year. The considerations just stated and the fact that a definite proposition from us seemed to be expected upon the reassembling of the conference led me to express a willingness to have the meeting still further postponed. It seems to me that it would be wise to give general authority to the President to invite other nations to such a conference at any time when there should be a fair prospect of accomplishing an international agreement on the subject of coinage. I desire also to earnestly suggest the wisdom of amending the existing statutes in regard to the issuance of Government bonds. The authority now vested in the Secretary of the Treasury to issue bonds is not as clear as it should be and the bonds authorized are disadvantageous to the Government both as to the time of their maturity and rate of interest. The Superintendent of Immigration through the Secretary of the Treasury reports that during the last fiscal year there arrived at our ports 440793 immigrants. Of these 1063 were not permitted to land under the limitations of the law and 577 were returned to the countries from whence they came by reason of their having become public charges. The total arrivals were 141034 less than for the previous year. The Secretary in his report gives an account of the operation of the Marine-Hospital Service and of the good work done under its supervision in preventing the entrance and spread of contagious diseases. The admonitions of the last two years touching our public health and the demonstrated danger of the introduction of contagious diseases from foreign ports have invested the subject of national quarantine with increased interest. A more general and harmonious system than now exists acting promptly and directly everywhere and constantly operating by preventive means to shield our country from the invasion of disease and at the same time having due regard to the rights and duties of local agencies would I believe add greatly to the safety of our people. The Secretary of War reports that the strength of the Army on the 30th day of September last was 25778 enlisted men and 2144 officers. The total expenditures of the Department for the year ending June 30 1893 amounted to $51966074.89. Of this sum $1992581.95 was for salaries and contingent expenses $23377828.35 for the support of the military establishment $6077033.18 for miscellaneous objects and 518631.41 for public works. This latter sum includes $15296876.46 for river and harbor improvements and $3266141.20 for fortifications and other works of defense. The total enrollment of the militia of the several States was on the 31st of October of the current year 112597 officers and enlisted men. The officers of the Army detailed for the inspection and instruction of this reserve of our military force report that increased in
