To the Senate and House of Representatives: Notwithstanding the added burdens rendered necessary by the war our people rejoice in a very satisfactory and steadily increasing degree of prosperity evidenced by the largest volume of business ever recorded. Manufacture has been productive agricultural pursuits have yielded abundant returns labor in all fields of industry is better rewarded revenue legislation passed by the present Congress has increased the Treasury's receipts to the amount estimated by its authors the finances of the Government have been successfully administered and its credit advanced to the first rank while its currency has been maintained at the world's highest standard. Military service under a common flag and for a righteous cause has strengthened the national spirit and served to cement more closely than ever the fraternal bonds between every section of the country. A review of the relation of the United States to other powers always appropriate is this year of primary importance in view of the momentous issues which have arisen demanding in one instance the ultimate determination by arms and involving far-reaching consequences which will require the earnest attention of the Congress. In my last annual message very full consideration was given to the question of the duty of the Government of the United States toward Spain and the Cuban insurrection as being by far the most important problem with which we were then called upon to deal. The considerations then advanced and the exposition of the views therein expressed disclosed my sense of the extreme gravity of the situation. Setting aside as logically unfounded or practically inadmissible the recognition of the Cuban insurgents as belligerents the recognition of the independence of Cuba neutral intervention to end the war by imposing a rational compromise between the contestants intervention in favor of one or the other party and forcible annexation of the island I concluded it was honestly due to our friendly relations with Spain that she should be given a reasonable chance to realize her expectations of reform to which she had become irrevocably committed. Within a few weeks previously she had announced comprehensive plans which it was confidently asserted would be efficacious to remedy the evils so deeply affecting our own country so injurious to the true interests of the mother country as well as to those of Cuba and so repugnant to the universal sentiment of humanity. The ensuing month brought little sign of real progress toward the pacification of Cuba. The autonomous administrations set up in the capital and some of the principal cities appeared not to gain the favor of the inhabitants nor to be able to extend their influence to the large extent of territory held by the insurgents while the military arm obviously unable to cope with the still active rebellion continued many of the most objectionable and offensive policies of the government that had preceded it. No tangible relief was afforded the vast numbers of unhappy reconcentrados despite the reiterated professions made in that regard and the amount appropriated by Spain to that end. The proffered expedient of zones of cultivation proved illusory. Indeed no less practical nor more delusive promises of succor could well have been tendered to the exhausted and destitute people stripped of all that made life and home dear and herded in a strange region among unsympathetic strangers hardly less necessitous than themselves. By the end of December the mortality among them had frightfully increased. Conservative estimates from Spanish sources placed the deaths among these distressed people at over 40 per cent from the time General Weyler's decree of reconcentration was enforced. With the acquiescence of the Spanish authorities a scheme was adopted for relief by charitable contributions raised in this country and distributed under the direction of the consul-general and the several consuls by noble and earnest individual effort through the organized agencies of the American Red Cross. Thousands of lives were thus saved but many thousands more were inaccessible to such forms of aid. The war continued on the old footing without comprehensive plan developing only the same spasmodic encounters barren of strategic result that had marked the course of the earlier ten years' rebellion as well as the present insurrection from its start. No alternative save physical exhaustion of either combatant and therewithal the practical ruin of the island lay in sight but how far distant no one could venture to conjecture. At this juncture on the 15th of February last occurred the destruction of the battle ship Maine while rightfully lying in the harbor of Havana on a mission of international courtesy and good will--a catastrophe the suspicious nature and horror of which stirred the nation's heart profoundly. It is a striking evidence of the poise and sturdy good sense distinguishing our national character that this shocking blow falling upon a generous people already deeply touched by preceding events in Cuba did not move them to an instant desperate resolve to tolerate no longer the existence of a condition of danger and disorder at our doors that made possible such a deed by whomsoever wrought. Yet the instinct of justice prevailed and the nation anxiously awaited the result of the searching investigation at once set on foot. The finding of the naval board of inquiry established that the origin of the explosion was external by a submarine mine and only halted through lack of positive testimony to fix the responsibility of its authorship. All these things carried conviction to the most thoughtful even before the finding of the naval court that a crisis in our relations with Spain and toward Cuba was at hand. So strong was this belief that it needed but a brief Executive suggestion to the Congress to receive immediate answer to the duty of making instant provision for the possible and perhaps speedily probable emergency of war and the remarkable almost unique spectacle was presented of a unanimous vote of both Houses on the 9th of March appropriating $50000000 "for the national defense and for each and every purpose connected therewith to be expended at the discretion of the President." That this act of prevision came none too soon was disclosed when the application of the fund was undertaken. Our coasts were practically undefended. Our Navy needed large provision for increased ammunition and supplies and even numbers to cope with any sudden attack from the navy of Spain which comprised modern vessels of the highest type of continental perfection. Our Army also required enlargement of men and munitions. The details of the hurried preparation for the dreaded contingency are told in the reports of the Secretaries of War and of the Navy and need not be repeated here. It is sufficient to say that the outbreak of war when it did come found our nation not unprepared to meet the conflict. Nor was the apprehension of coming strife confined to our own country. It was felt by the continental powers which on April 6 through their ambassadors and envoys addressed to the Executive an expression of hope that humanity and moderation might mark the course of this Government and people and that further negotiations would lead to an agreement which while securing the maintenance of peace would afford all necessary guaranties for the reestablishment of order in Cuba. In responding to that representation I said I shared the hope the envoys had expressed that peace might be preserved in a manner to terminate the chronic condition of disturbance in Cuba so injurious and menacing to our interests and tranquillity as well as shocking to our sentiments of humanity; and while appreciating the humanitarian and disinterested character of the communication they had made on behalf of the powers I stated the confidence of this Government for its part that equal appreciation would be shown for its own earnest and unselfish endeavors to fulfill a duty to humanity by ending a situation the indefinite prolongation of which had become insufferable. Still animated by the hope of a peaceful solution and obeying the dictates of duty no effort was relaxed to bring about a speedy ending of the Cuban struggle. Negotiations to this object continued actively with the Government of Spain looking to the immediate conclusion of a six months' armistice in Cuba with a view to effect the recognition of her people's right to independence. Besides this the instant revocation of the order of reconcentration was asked so that the sufferers returning to their homes and aided by united American and Spanish effort might be put in a way to support themselves and by orderly resumption of the well-nigh destroyed productive energies of the island contribute to the restoration of its tranquillity and well-being. Negotiations continued for some little time at Madrid resulting in offers by the Spanish Government which could not but be regarded as inadequate. It was proposed to confide the preparation of peace to the insular parliament yet to be convened under the autonomous decrees of November 1897 but without impairment in any wise of the constitutional powers of the Madrid Government which to that end would grant an armistice if solicited by the insurgents for such time as the general in chief might see fit to fix. How and with what scope of discretionary powers the insular parliament was expected to set about the "preparation" of peace did not appear. If it were to be by negotiation with the insurgents the issue seemed to rest on the one side with a body chosen by a fraction of the electors in the districts under Spanish control and on the other with the insurgent population holding the interior country unrepresented in the so-called parliament and defiant at the suggestion of suing for peace. Grieved and disappointed at this barren outcome of my sincere endeavors to reach a practicable solution I felt it my duty to remit the whole question to the Congress. In the message of April 11 1898 I announced that with this last overture in the direction of immediate peace in Cuba and its disappointing reception by Spain the effort of the Executive was brought to an end. I again reviewed the alternative courses of action which had been proposed concluding that the only one consonant with international policy and compatible with our firm-set historical traditions was intervention as a neutral to stop the war and check the hopeless sacrifice of life even though that resort involved "hostile constraint upon both the parties to the contest as well to enforce a truce as to guide the eventual settlement." The grounds justifying that step were the interests of humanity the duty to protect the life and property of our citizens in Cuba the right to check injury to our commerce and people through the devastation of the island and most important the need of removing at once and forever the constant menace and the burdens entailed upon our Government by the uncertainties and perils of the situation caused by the unendurable disturbance in Cuba. I said: The long trial has proved that the object for which Spain has waged the war can not be attained. The fire of insurrection may flame or may smolder with varying seasons but it has not been and it is plain that it can not be extinguished by present methods. The only hope of relief and repose from a condition which can no longer be endured is the enforced pacification of Cuba. In the name of humanity in the name of civilization in behalf of endangered American interests which give us the right and the duty to speak and to act the war in Cuba must stop. In view of all this the Congress was asked to authorize and empower the President to take measures to secure a full and final termination of hostilities between Spain and the people of Cuba and to secure in the island the establishment of a stable government capable of maintaining order and observing its international obligations insuring peace and tranquillity and the security of its citizens as well as our own and for the accomplishment of those ends to use the military and naval forces of the United States as might be necessary with added authority to continue generous relief to the starving people of Cuba. The response of the Congress after nine days of earnest deliberation during which the almost unanimous sentiment of your body was developed on every point save as to the expediency of coupling the proposed action with a formal recognition of the Republic of Cuba as the true and lawful government of that island--a proposition which failed of adoption--the Congress after conference on the 19th of April by a vote of 42 to 35 in the Senate and 311 to 6 in the House of Representatives passed the memorable joint resolution declaring-- First. That the people of the island of Cuba are and of right ought to be free and independent. Second. That it is the duty of the United States to demand and the Government of the United States does hereby demand that the Government of Spain at once relinquish its authority and government in the island of Cuba and withdraw its land and naval forces from Cuba and Cuban waters. Third. That the President of the United States be and he hereby is directed and empowered to use the entire land and naval forces of the United States and to call into the actual service of the United States the militia of the several States to such extent as may be necessary to carry these resolutions into effect. Fourth. That the United States hereby disclaims any disposition or intention to exercise sovereignty jurisdiction or control over said island except for the pacification thereof and asserts its determination when that is accomplished to leave the government and control of the island to its people. This resolution was approved by the Executive on the next day April 20. A copy was at once communicated to the Spanish minister at this capital who forthwith announced that his continuance in Washington had thereby become impossible and asked for his passports which were given him. He thereupon withdrew from Washington leaving the protection of Spanish interests in the United States to the French ambassador and the Austro-Hungarian minister. Simultaneously with its communication to the Spanish minister here General Woodford the American minister at Madrid was telegraphed confirmation of the text of the joint resolution and directed to communicate it to the Government of Spain with the formal demand that it at once relinquish its authority and government in the island of Cuba and withdraw its forces therefrom coupling this demand with announcement of the intentions of this Government as to the future of the island in conformity with the fourth clause of the resolution and giving Spain until noon of April 23 to reply. That demand although as above shown officially made known to the Spanish envoy here was not delivered at Madrid. After the instruction reached General Woodford on the morning of April 21 but before he could present it the Spanish minister of state notified him that upon the President's approval of the joint resolution the Madrid Government regarding the act as "equivalent to an evident declaration of war" had ordered its minister in Washington to withdraw thereby breaking off diplomatic relations between the two countries and ceasing all official communication between their respective representatives. General Woodford thereupon demanded his passports and quitted Madrid the same day. Spain having thus denied the demand of the United States and initiated that complete form of rupture of relations which attends a state of war the executive powers authorized by the resolution were at once used by me to meet the enlarged contingency of actual war between sovereign states. On April 22 I proclaimed a blockade of the north coast of Cuba including ports on said coast between Cardenas and Bahia Honda and the port of Cienfuegos on the south coast of Cuba and on the 23d I called for volunteers to execute the purpose of the resolution. By my message of April 25 the Congress was informed of the situation and I recommended formal declaration of the existence of a state of war between the United States and Spain. The Congress accordingly voted on the same day the act approved April 25 1898 declaring the existence of such war from and including the 21st day of April and reenacted the provision of the resolution of April 20 directing the President to use all the armed forces of the nation to carry that act into effect.|| Due notification of the existence of war as aforesaid was given April 25 by telegraph to all the governments with which the United States maintain relations in order that their neutrality might be assured during the war. The various governments responded with proclamations of neutrality each after its own methods. It is not among the least gratifying incidents of the struggle that the obligations of neutrality were impartially discharged by all often under delicate and difficult circumstances. In further fulfillment of international duty I issued April 26 1893 a proclamation announcing the treatment proposed to be accorded to vessels and their cargoes as to blockade contraband the exercise of the right of search and the immunity of neutral flags and neutral goods under enemy's flag. A similar proclamation was made by the Spanish Government. In the conduct of hostilities the rules of the Declaration of Paris including abstention from resort to privateering have accordingly been observed by both belligerents although neither was a party to that declaration. Our country thus after an interval of half a century of peace with all nations found itself engaged in deadly conflict with a foreign enemy. Every nerve was strained to meet the emergency. The response to the initial call for 125000 volunteers was instant and complete as was also the result of the second call of May 25 for 75000 additional volunteers. The ranks of the Regular Army were increased to the limits provided by the act of April 26 1898. The enlisted force of the Navy on the 15th day of August when it reached its maximum numbered 24123 men and apprentices. One hundred and three vessels were added to the Navy by purchase 1 was presented to the Government 1 leased and the 4 vessels of the International Navigation Company--the St. Paul St. Louis New York and Paris--were chartered. In addition to these the revenue cutters and lighthouse tenders were turned over to the Navy Department and became temporarily a part of the auxiliary Navy. The maximum effective fighting force of the Navy during the war separated into classes was as follows: Four battle ships of the first class 1 battle ship of the second class 2 armored cruisers 6 coast-defense monitors 1 armored ram 12 protected cruisers 3 unprotected cruisers 18 gunboats 1 dynamite cruiser 11 torpedo boats; vessels of the old Navy including monitors 14. Auxiliary Navy: 11 auxiliary cruisers 28 converted yachts 27 converted tugs 19 converted colliers 15 revenue cutters 4 light-house tenders and 19 miscellaneous vessels. Much alarm was felt along our entire Atlantic seaboard lest some attack might be made by the enemy. Every precaution was taken to prevent possible injury to our great cities lying along the coast. Temporary garrisons were provided drawn from the State militia; infantry and light batteries were drawn from the volunteer force. About 12000 troops were thus employed. The coast signal service was established for observing the approach of an enemy's ships to the coast of the United States and the Life-Saving and Light-House services cooperated which enabled the Navy Department to have all portions of the Atlantic coast from Maine to Texas under observation. The auxiliary Navy was created under the authority of Congress and was officered and manned by the Naval Militia of the several States. This organization patrolled the coast and performed the duty of a second line of defense. Under the direction of the Chief of Engineers submarine mines were placed at the most exposed points. Before the outbreak of the war permanent mining casemates and cable galleries had been constructed at nearly all important harbors. Most of the torpedo material was not to be found in the market and had to be specially manufactured. Under date of April 19 district officers were directed to take all preliminary measures short of the actual attaching of the loaded mines to the cables and on April 22 telegraphic orders were issued to place the loaded mines in position. The aggregate number of mines placed was 1535 at the principal harbors from Maine to California. Preparations were also made for the planting of mines at certain other harbors but owing to the early destruction of the Spanish fleet these mines were not placed. The Signal Corps was promptly organized and performed service of the most difficult and important character. Its operations during the war covered the electrical connection of all coast fortifications the establishment of telephonic and telegraphic facilities for the camps at Manila Santiago and in Puerto Rico. There were constructed 300 miles of line at ten great camps thus facilitating military movements from those points in a manner heretofore unknown in military administration. Field telegraph lines were established and maintained under the enemy's fire at Manila and later the Manila-Hongkong cable was reopened. In Puerto Rico cable communications were opened over a discontinued route and on land the headquarters of the commanding officer was kept in telegraphic or telephonic communication with the division commanders on four different lines of operations. There was placed in Cuban waters a completely outfitted cable ship with war cables and cable gear suitable both for the destruction of communications belonging to the enemy and the establishment of our own. Two ocean cables were destroyed under the enemy's batteries at Santiago. The day previous to the landing of General Shafter's corps at Caimanera within 20 miles of the landing place cable communications were established and a cable station opened giving direct communication with the Government at Washington. This service was invaluable to the Executive in directing the operations of the Army and Navy. With a total force of over 1300 the loss was by disease in camp and field officers and men included only 5. The national-defense fund of $50000000 was expended in large part by the Army and Navy and the objects for which it was used are fully shown in the reports of the several Secretaries. It was a most timely appropriation enabling the Government to strengthen its defenses and make preparations greatly needed in case of war. This fund being inadequate to the requirements of equipment and for the conduct of the war the patriotism of the Congress provided the means in the war-revenue act of June 13 by authorizing a 3 per cent popular loan not to exceed $400000000 and by levying additional imposts and taxes. Of the authorized loan $200000000 were offered and promptly taken the subscriptions so far exceeding the call as to cover it many times over while preference being given to the smaller bids no single allotment exceeded $5000. This was a most encouraging and significant result showing the vast resources of the nation and the determination of the people to uphold their country's honor. It is not within the province of this message to narrate the history of the extraordinary war that followed the Spanish declaration of April 21 but a brief recital of its more salient features is appropriate. The first encounter of the war in point of date took place April 27 when a detachment of the blockading squadron made a reconnoissance in force at Matanzas shelled the harbor forts and demolished several new works in construction. The next engagement was destined to mark a memorable epoch in maritime warfare. The Pacific fleet under Commodore George Dewey had lain for some weeks at Hongkong. Upon the colonial proclamation of neutrality being issued and the customary twenty-four hours' notice being given it repaired to Mirs Bay near Hongkong whence it proceeded to the Philippine Islands under telegraphed orders to capture or destroy the formidable Spanish fleet then assembled at Manila. At daybreak on the 1st of May the American force entered Manila Bay and after a few hours' engagement effected the total destruction of the Spanish fleet consisting of ten war ships and a transport besides capturing the naval station and forts at Cavite thus annihilating the Spanish naval power in the Pacific Ocean and completely controlling the bay of Manila with the ability to take the city at will. Not a life was lost on our ships the wounded only numbering seven while not a vessel was materially injured. For this gallant achievement the Congress upon my recommendation fitly bestowed upon the actors preferment and substantial reward. The effect of this remarkable victory upon the spirit of our people and upon the fortunes of the war was instant. A prestige of invincibility thereby attached to our arms which continued throughout the struggle. Reenforcements were hurried to Manila under the command of Major-General Merritt and firmly established within sight of the capital which lay helpless before our guns. On the 7th day of May the Government was advised officially of the victory at Manila and at once inquired of the commander of our fleet what troops would be required. The information was received on the 15th day of May and the first army expedition sailed May 25 and arrived off Manila June 30. Other expeditions soon followed the total force consisting of 641 officers and 15058 enlisted men. Only reluctance to cause needless loss of life and property prevented the early storming and capture of the city and therewith the absolute military occupancy of the whole group. The insurgents meanwhile had resumed the active hostilities suspended by the uncompleted truce of December 1897. Their forces invested Manila from the northern and eastern sides but were constrained by Admiral Dewey and General Merrill from attempting an assault. It was fitting that whatever was to be done in the way of decisive operations in that quarter should be accomplished by the strong arm of the United States alone. Obeying the stern precept of war which enjoins the overcoming of the adversary and the extinction of his power wherever assailable as the speedy and sure means to win a peace divided victory was not permissible for no partition of the rights and responsibilities attending the enforcement of a just and advantageous peace could be thought of. Following the comprehensive scheme of general attack powerful forces were assembled at various points on our coast to invade Cuba and Puerto Rico. Meanwhile naval demonstrations were made at several exposed points. On May 11 the cruiser Wilmington and torpedo boat Winslow were unsuccessful in an attempt to silence the batteries at Cardenas a gallant ensign Worth Bagley and four seamen falling. These grievous fatalities were strangely enough among the very few which occurred during our naval operations in this extraordinary conflict. Meanwhile the Spanish naval preparations had been pushed with great vigor. A powerful squadron under Admiral Cervera which had assembled at the Cape Verde Islands before the outbreak of hostilities had crossed the ocean and by its erratic movements in the Caribbean Sea delayed our military plans while baffling the pursuit of our fleets. For a time fears were felt lest the Oregon and Marietta then nearing home after their long voyage from San Francisco of over 15000 miles might be surprised by Admiral Cervera's fleet but their fortunate arrival dispelled these apprehensions and lent much-needed reenforcement. Not until Admiral Cervera took refuge in the harbor of Santiago de Cuba about May 19 was it practicable to plan a systematic naval and military attack upon the Antillean possessions of Spain. Several demonstrations occurred on the coasts of Cuba and Puerto Rico in preparation for the larger event. On May 13 the North Atlantic Squadron shelled San Juan de Puerto Rico. On May 30 Commodore Schley's squadron bombarded the forts guarding the mouth of Santiago Harbor. Neither attack had any material result. It was evident that well-ordered land operations were indispensable to achieve a decisive advantage. The next act in the war thrilled not alone the hearts of our countrymen but the world by its exceptional heroism. On the night of June 3 Lieutenant Hobson aided by seven devoted volunteers blocked the narrow outlet from Santiago Harbor by sinking the collier Merrimac in the channel under a fierce fire from the shore batteries escaping with their lives as by a miracle but falling into the hands of the Spaniards. It is a most gratifying incident of the war that the bravery of this little band of heroes was cordially appreciated by the Spanish admiral who sent a flag of truce to notify Admiral Sampson of their safety and to compliment them on their daring act. They were subsequently exchanged July 7. By June 7 the cutting of the last Cuban cable isolated the island. Thereafter the invasion was vigorously prosecuted. On June 10 under a heavy protecting fire a landing of 600 marines from the Oregon Marblehead and Yankee was effected in Guantanamo Bay where it had been determined to establish a naval station. This important and essential port was taken from the enemy after severe fighting by the marines who were the first organized force of the United States to land in Cuba. The position so won was held despite desperate attempts to dislodge our forces. By June 16 additional forces were landed and strongly in-trenched. On June 22 the advance of the invading army under Major-General Shafter landed at Daiquiri about 15 miles east of Santiago. This was accomplished under great difficulties but with marvelous dispatch. On June 23 the movement against Santiago was begun. On the 24th the first serious engagement took place in which the First and Tenth Cavalry and the First United States Volunteer Cavalry General Young's brigade of General Wheeler's division participated losing heavily. By nightfall however ground within 5 miles of Santiago was won. The advantage was steadily increased. On July 1 a severe battle took place our forces gaining the outworks of Santiago; on the 2d El Caney and San Juan were taken after a desperate charge and the investment of the city was completed. The Navy cooperated by shelling the town and the coast forts. On the day following this brilliant achievement of our land forces the 3d of July occurred the decisive naval combat of the war. The Spanish fleet attempting to leave the harbor was met by the American squadron under command of Commodore Sampson. In less than three hours all the Spanish ships were destroyed the two torpedo boats being sunk and the Maria Teresa Almirante Oquendo Vizcaya and Cristobal Colon driven ashore. The Spanish admiral and over 1300 men were taken prisoners. While the enemy's loss of life was deplorably large some 600 perishing on our side but one man was killed on the Brooklyn and one man seriously wounded. Although our ships were repeatedly struck not one was seriously injured. Where all so conspicuously distinguished themselves from the commanders to the gunners and the unnamed heroes in the boiler rooms each and all contributing toward the achievement of this astounding victory for which neither ancient nor modern history affords a parallel in the completeness of the event and the marvelous disproportion of casualties it would be invidious to single out any for especial honor. Deserved promotion has rewarded the more conspicuous actors. The nation's profoundest gratitude is due to all of these brave men who by their skill and devotion in a few short hours crushed the sea power of Spain and wrought a triumph whose decisiveness and far-reaching consequences can scarcely be measured. Nor can we be unmindful of the achievements of our builders mechanics and artisans for their skill in the construction of our war ships. With the catastrophe of Santiago Spain's effort upon the ocean virtually ceased. A spasmodic effort toward the end of June to send her Mediterranean fleet under Admiral Camara to relieve Manila was abandoned the expedition being recalled after it had passed through the Suez Canal. The capitulation of Santiago followed. The city was closely besieged by land while the entrance of our ships into the harbor cut off all relief on that side. After a truce
