To the Senate and House of Representatives: At the threshold of your deliberations you are called to mourn with your countrymen the death of Vice-President Hobart who passed from this life on the morning of November 21 last. His great soul now rests in eternal peace. His private life was pure and elevated. while his public career was ever distinguished by large capacity stainless integrity and exalted motives. He has been removed from the high office which he honored and dignified but his lofty character his devotion to duty his honesty of purpose and noble virtues remain with us as a priceless legacy and example. The Fifty-sixth Congress convenes in its first regular session with the country in a condition of unusual prosperity of universal good will among the people at home and in relations of peace and friendship with every government of the world. Our foreign commerce has shown great increase in volume and value. The combined imports and exports for the year are the largest ever shown by a single year in all our history. Our exports for 1899 alone exceeded by more than a billion dollars our imports and exports combined in 1870. The imports per capita are 20 per cent less than in 1870 while the exports per capita are 58 per cent more than in 1870 showing the enlarged capacity of the United States to satisfy the wants of its own increasing population as well as to contribute to those of the peoples of other nations. Exports of agricultural products were $784776142. Of manufactured products we exported in value $339592146 being larger than any previous year. It is a noteworthy fact that the only years in all our history when the products of our manufactories sold abroad exceeded those bought abroad were 1898 and 1899. Government receipts from all sources for the fiscal year ended June 30 1899 including $1179831414 part payment of the Central Pacific Railroad indebtedness aggregated $610982004.35. Customs receipts were $206128481.75 and those from internal revenue $273437161.51. For the fiscal year the expenditures were $700093564.02 leaving a deficit of $89111559.67. The Secretary of the Treasury estimates that the receipts for the current fiscal year will aggregate $640958112 and upon the basis of present appropriations the expenditures will aggregate $600958112 leaving a surplus of $40000000. For the fiscal year ended June 30 1899 the internal-revenue receipts were increased about $100000000. The present gratifying strength of the Treasury is shown by the fact that on December 1 1899 the available cash balance was $278004837.72 Of which $239744905.36 was in gold coin and bullion. The conditions of confidence which prevail throughout the country have brought gold into more general use and customs receipts are now almost entirely paid in that coin. The strong position of the Treasury with respect to cash on band and the favorable showing made by the revenues have made it possible for the Secretary of the Treasury to take action under the provisions of section 3694 Revised Statutes relating to the sinking fund. Receipts exceeded expenditures for the first five months of the current fiscal year by $13413389.91 and as mentioned above the Secretary of the Treasury estimates that there will be a surplus of approximately $40000000 at the end of the year. Under such conditions it was deemed advisable and proper to resume compliance with the provisions of the sinking-fund law which for eight years has not been done because of deficiencies in the revenues. The Treasury Department therefore offered to purchase during November $25000000 of the 5 per cent loan of 1904 or the 4 per cent funded loan of 1907 at the current market price. The amount offered and purchased during November was $18408600. The premium paid by the Government on such purchases was $2263521 and the net saving in interest was about $2885000. The success of this operation was sufficient to induce the Government to continue the offer to purchase bonds to and including the 23d day of December instant unless the remainder of the $25000000 called for should be presented in the meantime for redemption Increased activity in industry with its welcome attendant--a larger employment for labor at higher wages--gives to the body of the people a larger power to absorb the circulating medium. It is further true that year by year with larger areas of land under cultivation the increasing volume of agricultural products cotton corn and wheat calls for a larger volume of money supply. This is especially noticeable at the crop-harvesting and crop-moving period. In its earlier history the National Banking Act seemed to prove a reasonable avenue through which needful additions to the circulation could from time to time be made. Changing conditions have apparently rendered it now inoperative to that end. The high margin in bond securities required resulting from large premiums which Government bonds command in the market or the tax on note issues or both operating together appear to be the influences which impair its public utility. The attention of Congress is respectfully invited to this important matter with the view of ascertaining whether or not such reasonable modifications can be made in the National Banking Act as will render its service in the particulars here referred to more responsive to the people's needs. I again urge that national banks be authorized to organize with a capital of $25000. I urgently recommend that to support the existing gold standard and to maintain "the parity in value of the coins of the two metals (gold and silver) and the equal power of every dollar at all times in the market and in the payment of debts" the Secretary of the Treasury be given additional power and charged with the duty to sell United States bonds and to employ such other effective means as may be necessary to these ends. The authority should include the power to sell bonds on long and short time as conditions may require and should provide for a rate of interest lower than that fixed by the act of January 14 1875. While there is now no commercial fright which withdraws gold from the Government but on the contrary such widespread confidence that gold seeks the Treasury demanding paper money in exchange yet the very situation points to the present as the most fitting time to make adequate provision to insure the continuance of the gold standard and of public confidence in the ability and purpose of the Government to meet all its obligations in the money which the civilized world recognizes as the best. The financial transactions of the Government are conducted upon a gold basis. We receive gold when we sell United States bonds and use gold for their payment. We are maintaining the parity of all the money issued or coined by authority of the Government. We are doing these things with the means at hand. Happily at the present time we are not compelled to resort to loans to supply gold. It has been done in the past however and may have to be done in the future. It behooves us therefore to provide at once the best means to meet the emergency when it arises and the best means are those which are the most certain and economical. Those now authorized have the virtue neither of directness nor economy. We have already eliminated one of the causes of our financial plight and embarrassment during the years 1893 1894 1895 and 1896. Our receipts now equal our expenditures; deficient revenues no longer create alarm Let us remove the only remaining cause by conferring the full and necessary power on the Secretary of the Treasury and impose upon him the duty to uphold the present gold standard and preserve the coins of the two metals on a parity with each other which is the repeatedly declared policy of the United States. In this connection I repeat my former recommendations that a portion of the gold holdings shall be placed in a trust fund from which greenbacks shall be redeemed upon presentation but when once redeemed shall not thereafter be paid out except for gold. The value of an American merchant marine to the extension of our commercial trade and the strengthening of our power upon the sea invites the immediate action of the Congress. Our national development will be one-sided and unsatisfactory so long as the remarkable growth of our inland industries remains unaccompanied by progress on the seas. There is no lack of constitutional authority for legislation which shall give to the country maritime strength commensurate with its industrial achievements and with its rank among the nations of the earth The past year has recorded exceptional activity in our shipyards. and the promises of continual prosperity in shipbuilding are abundant. Advanced legislation for the protection of our seamen has been enacted. Our coast trade under regulations wisely framed at the beginning of the Government and since shows results for the past fiscal year unequaled in our records or those of any other power. We shall fail to realize our opportunities however if we complacently regard only matters at home and blind ourselves to the necessity of securing our share in the valuable carrying trade of the world. Last year American vessels transported a smaller share of our exports and imports than during any former year in all our history and the measure of our dependence upon foreign shipping was painfully manifested to our people. Without any choice of our own but from necessity the Departments of the Government charged with military and naval operations in the East and West Indies had to obtain from foreign flags merchant vessels essential for those operations. The other great nations have not hesitated to adopt the required means to develop their shipping as a factor in national defense and as one of the surest and speediest means of obtaining for their producers a share in foreign markets. Like vigilance and effort on our part cannot fail to improve our situation which is regarded with humiliation at home and with surprise abroad. Even the seeming sacrifices which at the beginning may be involved will be offset later by more than equivalent gains. The expense is as nothing compared to the advantage to be achieved. The reestablishment of our merchant marine involves in a large measure our continued industrial progress and the extension of our commercial triumphs. I am satisfied the judgment of the country favors the policy of aid to our merchant marine which will broaden our commerce and markets and upbuild our sea-carrying capacity for the products of agriculture and manufacture; which with the increase of our Navy mean more work and wages to our countrymen as well as a safeguard to American interests in every part of the world. Combinations of capital organized into trusts to control the conditions of trade among our citizens to stifle competition limit production and determine the prices of products used and consumed by the people are justly provoking public discussion and should early claim the attention of the Congress. The Industrial Commission created by the act of the Congress of June 18 1898 has been engaged in extended hearings upon the disputed questions involved in the subject of combinations in restraint of trade and competition. They have not yet completed their investigation of this subject and the conclusions and recommendations at which they may arrive are undetermined. The subject is one giving rise to many divergent views as to the nature and variety or cause and extent of the 111juries to the public which may result from large combinations concentrating more or less numerous enterprises and establishments which previously to the formation of the combination were carried on separately. It is universally conceded that combinations which engross or control the market of any particular kind of merchandise or commodity necessary to the general community by suppressing natural and ordinary competition whereby prices are unduly enhanced to the general consumer re obnoxious not only to the common law but also to the public welfare. There must be a remedy for the evils involved in such organizations. If the present law can be extended more certainly to control or check these monopolies or trusts it should be done without delay. Whatever power the Congress possesses over this most important subject should be promptly ascertained and asserted. President Harrison in his annual message of December 3 1889 says: Earnest attention should be given by Congress to a consideration of the question how far the restraint of those combinations of capital commonly called 11 trusts" is matter of Federal jurisdiction. When organized as they often are to crush out all 'healthy competition and to monopolize the production or sale of an article of commerce and general necessity they are dangerous conspiracies against the public good and should be made the subject of prohibitory and even penal legislation. An act to protect trade and commerce against unlawful restraints and monopolies was passed by Congress on the 2d of July 1890. The provisions of this statute are comprehensive and stringent. It declares every contract or combination in the form of a trust or otherwise or conspiracy in the restraint of trade or commerce among the several States or with foreign nations to be unlawful. It denominates as a criminal every person who makes any such contract or engages in any such combination or conspiracy and provides a punishment by fine or imprisonment. It invests the several circuit courts of the United States with jurisdiction to prevent and restrain violations of the act and makes it the duty of the several United States district attorneys under the direction of the Attorney General to institute proceedings in equity to prevent and restrain such violations. It further confers upon any person who shall be injured in his business or property by any other person or corporation by reason of anything forbidden or declared to be unlawful by the act the power to sue therefore in any circuit court of the United States without respect to the amount in controversy and to recover threefold the damages by him sustained and the costs of the suit including reasonable attorney fees. It will be perceived that the act is aimed at every kind of combination in the nature of a trust or monopoly in restraint of interstate or international commerce. The prosecution by the United States of offenses under the act of 1890 has been frequently resorted to in the Federal courts and notable efforts in the restraint of interstate commerce such as the Trans-Missouri Freight Association and the joint Traffic Association have been successfully opposed and suppressed. President Cleveland in his annual message of December 7 1896 -- more than six years subsequent to the enactment of this law -- after stating the evils of these trust combinations says: Though Congress has attempted to deal with this matter by legislation the laws passed for that purpose thus far have proved ineffective not because of any lack of disposition or attempt to enforce them but simply because the laws themselves as interpreted by the courts do not reach the difficulty. If the insufficiencies of existing laws can be remedied by further legislation it should be done. The fact must be recognized however that all Federal legislation on this subject may fall short of its purpose because of inherent obstacles and also because of the complex character of our governmental system which while making the Federal authority supreme within its sphere has carefully limited that sphere by metes and bounds which cannot be transgressed. The decision of our highest court on this precise question renders it quite doubtful whether the evils of trusts and monopolies may be adequately treated through Federal action unless they seek directly and purposely to include in their objects transportation or intercourse between States or between the United States and foreign countries. It does not follow however that this is the limit of the remedy that may be applied. Even though it may be found that Federal authority is not broad enough to fully reach the case there can be no doubt of the power of the several States to act effectively in the premises and there should be no reason to doubt their willingness to judiciously exercise such power. The State legislation to which President Cleveland looked for relief from the evils of trusts has failed to accomplish fully that object. This is probably due to a great extent to the fact that different States take different views as to the proper way to discriminate between evil and injurious combinations and those associations which are beneficial and necessary to the business prosperity of the country. The great diversity of treatment in different States arising from this cause and the intimate relations of all parts of the country to each other without regarding State lines in the conduct of business have made the enforcement of State laws difficult. It is apparent that uniformity of legislation upon this subject in the several States is much to be desired. It is to be hoped that such uniformity founded in a wise and just discrimination between what is injurious and what is useful and necessary in business operations may be obtained and that means may be found for the Congress within the limitations of its constitutional power so to supplement an effective code of State legislation as to make a complete system of laws throughout the United States adequate to compel a general observance of the salutary rules to which I have referred. The whole question is so important and far-reaching that I am sure no part of it will be lightly considered but every phase of it will have the studied deliberation of the Congress resulting in wise and judicious action. A review of our relations with foreign States is presented with such recommendations as are deemed appropriate. The long-pending boundary dispute between the Argentine Republic and Chile was settled in March last by the award of an arbitral commission on which the United States minister at Buenos Ayres served as umpire. Progress has been made toward the conclusion of a convention of extradition with the Argentine Republic. Having been advised and consented to by the United States Senate and ratified by Argentina it only awaits the adjustment of some slight changes in the text before exchange. In my last annual message I adverted to the claim of the Austro-Hungarian Government for indemnity for the killing of certain Austrian and Hungarian subjects by the authorities of the State of Pennsylvania at Lattimer while suppressing an unlawful tumult of miners September 10 1897. In view of the verdict of acquittal rendered by the court before which the sheriff and his deputies were tried for murder and following the established doctrine that the Government may not be held accountable for injuries suffered by individuals at the hands of the public authorities while acting in the line of duty in suppressing disturbance of the public peace this Government after due consideration of the claim advanced by the Austro-Hungarian Government was constrained to decline liability to indemnify the sufferers. It is gratifying to be able to announce that the Belgian Government has mitigated the restrictions on the importation of cattle from the United States to which I referred in my last annual message. Having been invited by Belgium to participate in a congress held at Brussels to revise the provisions of the general act Of July 2 1890 for the repression of the African slave trade to which the United States was a signatory party this Government preferred not to be represented by a plenipotentiary but reserved the right of accession to the result. Notable changes were made those especially concerning this country being in the line of the increased restriction of the deleterious trade in spirituous liquors with the native tribes which this Government has from the outset urgently advocated. The amended general act will be laid before the Senate with a view to its advice and consent. Early in the year the peace of Bolivia was disturbed by a successful insurrection. The United States minister remained at his post attending to the American interests in that quarter and using besides his good offices for the protection of the interests of British subjects in the absence of their national representative. On the establishment of the new Government our minister was directed to enter into relations therewith. General Pando was elected President of Bolivia on October 23. Our representative has been instructed to use all permissible friendly endeavors to induce the Government of Bolivia to amend its marriage laws so as to give legal status to the non-Catholic and civil marriages of aliens within its jurisdiction and strong hopes are entertained that the Bolivian law in this regard will be brought as was that of Peru some years ago into harmony with the general practice of modern States. A convention of extradition with Brazil signed May 14 1897 has been rati6ed by the Brazilian Legislature. During the past summer two national ships of the United States have visited Brazilian ports on a friendly mission and been cordially received. The voyage of the Wilininglon up the Amazon River gave rise to a passing misunderstanding owing to confusion in obtaining permission to visit the interior and make surveys in the general interest of navigation but the incident found a ready adjustment in harmony with the close relations of amity which this Government has always sedulously sought to cultivate with the commonwealths of the Western Continent. The claim growing out of the seizure of the American-owned newspaper "The Panama Star and Herald" by the authorities of Colombia has been settled after a controversy of several years by an agreement assessing at $30000 the indemnity to be paid by the Colombian Government in three installments of $10000 each. The good will of Colombia toward our country has been testified anew by the cordial extension of facilities to the Nicaraguan Canal Commission in their approaching investigation of the Panama Canal and other projected routes across the Isthmus of Darien. Toward the end of October an insurrectionary disturbance developed in the Colombian Republic. This movement has thus far not attained any decisive result and is still in progress. Discussion of the questions raised by the action of Denmark in imposing restrictions on the importation of American meats has continued without substantial result in our favor. The neighboring island Republic of Santo Domingo has lately been the scene of revolution following a long period of tranquility. It began with the killing of President Heureaux in July last and culminated in the relinquishment by the succeeding Vice-President of the reins of government to the insurgents. The first act of the provisional government was the calling of a presidential and constituent election. Juan Isidro Jimenez having been elected President was inaugurated on the 14th of November. Relations have been entered into with the newly established Government. The experimental association of Nicaragua Honduras and Salvador tinder the title of the Greater Republic of Central America when apparently on the threshold of a complete federal organization by the adoption of a constitution and the formation of a national legislature was disrupted in the last days of November 1898 by the withdrawal of Salvador. Thereupon Nicaragua and Honduras abandoned the joint compact each resuming its former independent sovereignty. This was followed by the reception of Minister Merry by the Republics of Nicaragua and Salvador while Minister Hunter in turn presented his credentials to the Government of Honduras thus reverting to the old distribution of the diplomatic agencies of the United States in Central America for which our existing statutes provide. A Nicaraguan envoy has been accredited to the United States. An insurrectionary movement under General Reyes broke out at Eluefields in February last and for a time exercised actual control in the Mosquito Territory. The Detroit was promptly sent thither for the protection of American interests. After a few weeks the Reyes government renounced the conflict giving place to the restored supremacy of Nicaragua. During the interregnum certain public dues accruing under Nicaraguan law were collected from American merchants by the authorities for the time being in effective administrative control. Upon the titular government regaining power a second payment of these dues was demanded. Controversy arose touching the validity of the original payment of the debt to the de facto regent of the territory. An arrangement was effected in April last by the United States minister and the foreign secretary of Nicaragua whereby the amounts of the duplicate payments were deposited with the British consul pending an adjustment of the matter by direct agreement between the Governments of the United States and Nicaragua. The controversy is still unsettled. The contract of the Maritime Canal Company of Nicaragua was declared forfeited by the Nicaraguan Government on the Tenth of October on the ground of nonfulfillment within the ten years' term stipulated in the contract. The Maritime Canal Company has lodged a protest against this action alleging rights in the premises which appear worthy of consideration. This Government expects that Nicaragua will afford the protestants a full and fair hearing upon the merits of the case. The Nicaragua Canal Commission which bad been engaged upon the work of examination and survey for a ship-canal route across Nicaragua having completed its labors and made its report was dissolved on May P and on June To a new commission known as the Isthmian Canal Commission was organized under the terms of the act approved March 3 1899 for the purpose of examining the American Isthmus with a view to determining the most practicable and feasible route for a ship canal across that Isthmus with its probable cost and other essential details. This Commission under the presidency of Rear-Admiral John G. Walker U. S. N. (retired) entered promptly upon the work intrusted to it and is now carrying on examinations in Nicaragua along the route of the Panama Canal and in Darien from the Atlantic in the neighborhood of the Atrato River to the Bay of Panama on the Pacific side. Good progress has been made but under the law a comprehensive and complete investigation is called for which will require much labor and considerable time for its accomplishment. The work will be prosecuted as expeditiously as possible and a report made at the earliest practicable date. The great importance of this work cannot be too often or too strongly pressed upon the attention of the Congress. In my message of a year ago I expressed my views of the necessity of a canal which would link the two great oceans to which I again invite your consideration. The reasons then presented for early action are even stronger now. A pleasing incident in the relations of this Government with that of Chile occurred in the generous assistance given to the war ship Newark when in distress in Chilean waters. Not alone in this way has the friendly disposition of Chile found expression. That country has acceded to the convention for the establishment of the Bureau of the American Republics in which organization every independent State of the continent now shares. The exchange of ratifications of a convention for the revival of the United States and Chilean Claims Commission and for the adjudication of claims heretofore presented but not determined during the life of the previous Commission has been delayed by reason of the necessity for fresh action by the Chilean Senate upon the amendments attached to the ratification of the treaty by the United States Senate. This formality is soon to be accomplished. In view of disturbances in the populous provinces of northern China where are many of our citizens and of the imminence of disorder near the capital and toward the seaboard a guard of marines was landed from the Boston and stationed during last winter in the legation compound at Peking. With the restoration of order this protection was withdrawn. The interests of our citizens in that vast Empire have not been neglected during the past year. Adequate protection has been secured for our missionaries and some injuries to their property have been redressed. American capital has sought and found various opportunities of competing to carry out the internal improvements which the Imperial Government is wisely encouraging and to develop the natural resources of the Empire. Our trade with China has continued to grow and our commercial rights under existing treaties have been everywhere maintained during the past year as they will be in the future. The extension of the area open to international foreign settlement at Shanghai and the opening of the ports of Nanking Tsing-tao (Kiao chao) and Ta-lien-wan to foreign trade and settlement will doubtless afford American enterprise additional facilities and new fields of which it will not be slow to take advantage. In my message to Congress of December 5 1898 1 urged that the recommendation which had been made to the Speaker of the House of Representatives by the Secretary of the Treasury on the 14th of June z898 for an appropriation for a commission to study the commercial and industrial conditions in the Chinese Empire and report as to the opportunities for and obstacles to the enlargement of markets in China for the raw products and manufactures of the United States should receive at your hands the consideration which its importance and timeliness merited but the Congress failed to take action. I now renew this recommendation as the importance of the subject has steadily grown since it was first submitted to you and no time should be lost in studying for ourselves the resources of this great field for American trade and enterprise. The death of President Faure in February last called forth those sincere expressions of sympathy which befit the relations of two Republics as closely allied by unbroken historic ties as are the United States and France. Preparations for the representation of the industries arts and products of the United States at the World's Exposition to be held in Paris next year continue on an elaborate and comprehensive scale thanks to the generous appropriation provided by Congress and to the friendly interest the French Government has shown in furthering a typical exhibit of American progress. There has been allotted to the United States a considerable addition of space which while placing our country in the first rant among exhibitors does not suffice to meet the increasingly urgent demands of our manufacturers. The efforts of the Commissioner General are ably directed toward a strictly representative display of all that most characteristically marks American achievement in the inventive arts and most adequately shows the excellence of our natural productions. In this age of keen rivalry among nations for mastery in commerce the doctrine of evolution and the rule of the survival of the fittest must be as inexorable in their operation as they are positive in the results they bring about. The place won in the struggle by an industrial people can only be held by unrelaxed endeavor and constant advance in achievement. The present extraordinary impetus in every line of American exportation and the astounding increase in the volume and value of our share in the world's markets may not be attributed to accidental conditions. The reasons are not far to seek. They lie deep in our national character and find expression year by year in every branch of handicraft in every new device whereby the materials we so abundantly produce are subdued to the artisan's will and made to yield the largest most practical and most beneficial return. The American exhibit at Paris should and I am confident will be an open volume whose lessons of skillfully directed endeavor unfaltering energy and consummate performance may be read by all on every page thus spreading abroad a clearer knowledge of the worth of our productions and the justice of our claim to an important place in the marts of the world. To accomplish this by judicious selection by recognition of paramount merit in whatever walk of trade or manufacture it may appear and by orderly classification and attractive installation is the task of our Commission. The United States Government building is approaching completion and no effort will be spared to make it worthy 
