To the Senate and House of Representatives: At the outgoing of the old and the incoming of the new century you begin the last session of the Fifty-sixth Congress with evidences on every hand of individual and national prosperity and with proof of the growing strength and increasing power for good of Republican institutions. Your countrymen will join with you in felicitation that American liberty is more firmly established than ever before and that love for it and the determination to preserve it are more universal than at any former period of our history. The Republic was never so strong because never so strongly entrenched in the hearts of the people as now. The Constitution with few amendments exists as it left the hands of its authors. The additions which have been made to it proclaim larger freedom and more extended citizenship. Popular government has demonstrated in its one hundred and twenty-four years of trial here its stability and security and its efficiency as the best instrument of national development and the best safeguard to human rights. When the Sixth Congress assembled in November 1800 the population of the United States was 5308483.It is now 76304799. Then we had sixteen States. Now we have forty-five. Then our territory consisted Of 909050 square miles. It is now 3846595 square miles. Education religion and morality have kept pace with our advancement in other directions and while extending its power the Government has adhered to its foundation principles and abated none of them in dealing with our new peoples and possessions. A nation so preserved and blessed gives reverent thanks to God and invokes His guidance and the continuance of His care and favor. In our foreign intercourse the dominant question has been the treatment of the Chinese problem. Apart from this our relations with the powers have been happy. The recent troubles in China spring from the antiforeign agitation which for the past three years has gained strength in the northern provinces. Their origin lies deep in the character of the Chinese races and in the traditions of their Government. The Taiping rebellion and the opening of Chinese ports to foreign trade and settlement disturbed alike the homogeneity and the seclusion of China. Meanwhile foreign activity made itself felt in all quarters not alone on the coast but along the great river arteries and in the remoter districts carrying new ideas and introducing new associations among a primitive people which had pursued for centuries a national policy of isolation. The telegraph and the railway spreading over their land the steamers plying on their waterways the merchant and the missionary penetrating year by year farther to the interior became to the Chinese mind types of an alien invasion changing the course of their national life and fraught with vague forebodings of disaster to their beliefs and their self-control. For several years before the present troubles all the resources of foreign diplomacy backed by moral demonstrations of the physical force of fleets and arms have been needed to secure due respect for the treaty rights of foreigners and to obtain satisfaction from the responsible authorities for the sporadic outrages upon the persons and property of unoffending sojourners which from time to time occurred at widely separated points in the northern provinces as in the case of the outbreaks in Sze-chuen and Shan-tung. Posting of antiforeign placards became a daily occurrence which the repeated reprobation of the Imperial power failed to check or punish. These inflammatory appeals to the ignorance and superstition of the masses mendacious and absurd in their accusations and deeply hostile in their spirit could not but work cumulative harm. They aimed at no particular class of foreigners; they were impartial in attacking everything foreign. An outbreak in Shan-tung in which German missionaries were slain was the too natural result of these malevolent teachings. The posting of seditious placards exhorting to the utter destruction of foreigners and of every foreign thing continued unrebuked. Hostile demonstrations toward the stranger gained strength by organization. The sect commonly styled the Boxers developed greatly in the provinces north of the Yang-Tse and with the collusion of many notable officials including some in the immediate councils of the Throne itself became alarmingly aggressive. No foreigner's life outside of the protected treaty ports was safe. No foreign interest was secure from spoliation. The diplomatic representatives of the powers in Peking strove in vain to check this movement. Protest was followed by demand and demand by renewed protest to be met with perfunctory edicts from the Palace and evasive and futile assurances from the Tsung-li Yamen. The circle of the Boxer influence narrowed about Peking and while nominally stigmatized as seditious it was felt that its spirit pervaded the capital itself that the Imperial forces were imbued with its doctrines and that the immediate counselors of the Empress Dowager were in full sympathy with the antiforeign movement. The increasing gravity of the conditions in China and the imminence of peril to our own diversified interests in the Empire as well as to those of all the other treaty governments were soon appreciated by this Government causing it profound solicitude. The United States from the earliest days of foreign intercourse with China had followed a policy of peace omitting no occasions to testify good will to further the extension of lawful trade to respect the sovereignty of its Government and to insure by all legitimate and kindly but earnest means the fullest measure of protection for the lives and property of our law-abiding citizens and for the exercise of their beneficent callings among the Chinese people. Mindful of this it was felt to be appropriate that our purposes should be pronounced in favor of such course as would hasten united action of the powers at Peking to promote the administrative reforms so greatly needed for strengthening the Imperial Government and maintaining the integrity of China in which we believed the whole western world to be alike concerned. To these ends I caused to be addressed to the several powers occupying territory and maintaining spheres of influence in China the circular proposals of 1899 inviting from them declarations of their intentions and views as to the desirability of the adoption of measures insuring the benefits of equality of treatment of all foreign trade throughout China. With gratifying unanimity the responses coincided in this common policy enabling me to see in the successful termination of these negotiations proof of the friendly spirit which animates the various powers interested in the untrammeled development of commerce and industry in the Chinese Empire as a source of vast benefit to the whole commercial world. In this conclusion which I had the gratification to announce as a completed engagement to the interested powers on March 20 1900 I hopefully discerned a potential factor for the abatement of the distrust of foreign purposes which for a year past had appeared to inspire the policy of the Imperial Government and for the effective exertion by it of power and authority to quell the critical antiforeign movement in the northern provinces most immediately influenced by the Manchu sentiment. Seeking to testify confidence in the willingness and ability of the Imperial administration to redress the wrongs and prevent the evils we suffered and feared the marine guard which had been sent to Peking in the autumn of 1899 for the protection of the legation was withdrawn at the earliest practicable moment and all pending questions were remitted as far as we were concerned to the ordinary resorts of diplomatic intercourse. The Chinese Government proved however unable to check the rising strength of the Boxers and appeared to be a prey to internal dissensions. In the unequal contest the antiforeign influences soon gained the ascendancy under the leadership of Prince Tuan. Organized armies of Boxers with which the Imperial forces affiliated held the country between Peking and the coast penetrated into Manchuria up to the Russian borders and through their emissaries threatened a like rising throughout northern China. Attacks upon foreigners destruction of their property and slaughter of native converts were reported from all sides. The Tsung-li Yamen already permeated with hostile sympathies could make no effective response to the appeals of the legations. At this critical juncture in the early spring of this year a proposal was made by the other powers that a combined fleet should be assembled in Chinese waters as a moral demonstration under cover of which to exact of the Chinese Government respect for foreign treaty rights and the suppression of the Boxers. The United States while not participating in the joint demonstration promptly sent from the Philippines all ships that could be spared for service on the Chinese coast. A small force of marines was landed at Taku and sent to Peking for the protection of the American legation. Other powers took similar action until some four hundred men were assembled in the capital as legation guards. Still the peril increased. The legations reported the development of the seditious movement in Peking and the need of increased provision for defense against it. While preparations were in progress for a larger expedition to strengthen the legation guards and keep the railway open an attempt of the foreign ships to make a landing at Taku was met by a fire from the Chinese forts. The forts were thereupon shelled by the foreign vessels the American admiral taking no part in the attack on the ground that we were not at war with China and that a hostile demonstration might consolidate the antiforeign elements and strengthen the Boxers to oppose the relieving column. Two days later the Taku forts were captured after a sanguinary conflict. Severance of communication with Peking followed and a combined force of additional guards which was advancing to Peking by the Pei-Ho was checked at Langfang. The isolation of the legations was complete. The siege and the relief of the legations has passed into undying history. In all the stirring chapter which records the heroism of the devoted band clinging to hope in the face of despair and the undaunted spirit that led their relievers through battle and suffering to the goal it is a memory of which my countrymen may be justly proud that the honor of our flag was maintained alike in the siege and the rescue and that stout American hearts have again set high in fervent emulation with true men of other race and language the indomitable courage that ever strives for the cause of right and justice. By June 19 the legations were cut off. An identical note from the Yamen ordered each minister to leave Peking under a promised escort within twenty-four hours. To gain time they replied asking prolongation of the time which was afterwards granted and requesting an interview with the Tsung-li Yamen on the following day. No reply being received on the morning of the 2oth the German minister Baron von Ketteler set out for the Yamen to obtain a response and oil the way was murdered. An attempt by the legation guard to recover his body was foiled by the Chinese. Armed forces turned out against the legations. Their quarters were surrounded and attacked. The mission compounds were abandoned their inmates taking refuge in the British legation where all the other legations and guards gathered for more effective defense. Four hundred persons were crowded in its narrow compass. Two thousand native converts were assembled in a nearby palace under protection of the foreigners. Lines of defense were strengthened trenches dug barricades raised and preparations made to stand a siege which at once began. From June 20 until July 17 writes Minister Conger 11 there was scarcely an hour during which there was not firing upon some part of our lines and into some of the legations varying from a single shot to a general and continuous attack along the whole line." Artillery was placed around the legations and on the over-looking palace walls and thousands Of 3-inch shot and shell were fired destroying some buildings and damaging all. So thickly did the balls rain that when the ammunition of the besieged ran low five quarts of Chinese bullets were gathered in an hour in one compound and recast. Attempts were made to burn the legations by setting neighboring houses on fire but the flames were successfully fought off although the Austrian Belgian Italian. and Dutch legations were then and subsequently burned. With the aid of the native converts directed by the missionaries to whose helpful co-operation Mr. Conger awards unstinted praise the British legation was made a veritable fortress. The British minister Sir Claude MacDonald was chosen general commander of the defense with the secretary of the American legation Mr. E. G. Squiers as chief of staff. To save life and ammunition the besieged sparingly returned the incessant fire of the Chinese soldiery fighting only to repel attack or make an occasional successful sortie for strategic advantage such as that of fifty-five American British and Russian marines led by Captain Myers of the United States Marine Corps which resulted in the capture of a formidable barricade on the wall that gravely menaced the American position. It was held to the last and proved an invaluable acquisition because commanding the water gate through which the relief column entered. During the siege the defenders lost 65 killed 135 wounded and 7 by disease the last all children. On July 14 the besieged bad their first communication with the Tsung-li Yamen from whom a message came inviting to a conference which was declined. Correspondence however ensued and a sort of armistice was agreed upon which stopped the bombardment and lessened the rifle fire for a time. Even then no protection whatever was afforded nor any aid given save to send to the legations a small supply of fruit and three sacks of flour. Indeed the only communication had with the Chinese Government related to the occasional delivery or dispatch of a telegram or to the demands of the Tsung-li Yamen for the withdrawal of the legations to the coast under escort. Not only are the protestations of the Chinese Government that it protected and succored the legations positively contradicted but irresistible proof accumulates that the attacks upon them were made by Imperial troops regularly uniformed armed and officered belonging to the command of Jung Lu the Imperial commander in chief. Decrees encouraging the Boxers organizing them tinder prominent Imperial officers provisioning them and even granting them large sums in the name of the Empress Dowager are known to exist. Members of the Tsung-li Yamen who counseled protection of the foreigners were beheaded. Even in the distant provinces men suspected of foreign sympathy were put to death prominent among these being Chang Yen-hoon formerly Chinese minister in Washington. With the negotiation of the partial armistice of July 14 a proceeding which was doubtless promoted by the representations of the Chinese envoy in Washington the way was opened for the conveyance to Mr. Conger of a test message sent by the Secretary of State through the kind offices of Minister Wu Ting-fang. Mr. Conger's reply dispatched from Peking on July 18 through the same channel afforded to the outside world the first tidings that the inmates of the legations were still alive and hoping for succor. This news stimulated the preparations for a joint relief expedition in numbers sufficient to overcome the resistance which for a month had been organizing between Taku and the capital. Reinforcements sent by all the co-operating Governments were constantly arriving. The United States contingent hastily assembled from the Philippines or dispatched from this country amounted to some 5000 men under the able command first of the lamented Colonel Liscurn and afterwards of General Chaffee. Toward the end of July the movement began. A severe conflict followed at Tientsin in which Colonel Liscurn was killed. The city was stormed and partly destroyed. Its capture afforded the base of operations from which to make the final advance which began in the first days of August the expedition being made up of Japanese Russian British and American troops at the outset. Another battle was fought and won at Yangtsun. Thereafter the disheartened Chinese troops offered little show of resistance. A few days later the important position of Ho-si-woo was taken. A rapid march brought the united forces to the populous city of Tung Chow which capitulated without a contest. On August 14 the capital was reached. After a brief conflict beneath the walls the relief column entered and the legations were saved. The United States soldiers sailors and marines officers and men alike in those distant climes and unusual surroundings showed the same valor discipline and good conduct and gave proof of the same high degree of intelligence and efficiency which have distinguished them in every emergency. The Imperial family and the Government had fled a few days before. The city was without visible control. The remaining Imperial soldiery had made on the night of the 13th a last attempt to exterminate the besieged which was gallantly repelled. It fell to the occupying forces to restore order and organize a provisional administration. Happily the acute disturbances were confined to the northern provinces. It is a relief to recall and a pleasure to record the loyal conduct of the viceroys and local authorities of the southern and eastern provinces. Their efforts were continuously directed to the pacific control of the vast populations under their rule and to the scrupulous observance of foreign treaty rights. At critical moments they did not hesitate to memorialize the Throne urging the protection of the legations the restoration of communication and the assertion of the Imperial authority against the subversive elements. They maintained excellent relations with the official representatives of foreign powers. To their kindly disposition is largely due the success of the consuls in removing many of the missionaries from the interior to places of safety. In this relation the action of the consuls should be highly commended. In Shan-tung and eastern Chi-li the task was difficult but thanks to their energy and the cooperation of American and foreign naval commanders hundreds of foreigners including those of other nationalities than ours were rescued from imminent peril. The policy of the United States through all this trying period was clearly announced and scrupulously carried out. A circular note to the powers dated July 3 proclaimed our attitude. Treating the condition in the north as one of virtual anarchy in which the great provinces of the south and southeast had no share we regarded the local authorities in the latter quarters as representing the Chinese people with whom we sought to remain in peace and friendship. Our declared aims involved no war against the Chinese nation. We adhered to the legitimate office of rescuing the imperiled legation obtaining redress for wrongs already suffered securing wherever possible the safety of American life and property in China and preventing a spread of the disorders or their recurrence. As was then said " The policy of the Government of the United States is to seek a solution which may bring about permanent safety and peace to China preserve Chinese territorial and administrative entity protect all rights guaranteed to friendly powers by treaty and international law and safeguard for the world the principle of equal and impartial trade with all parts of the Chinese Empire." Faithful to those professions which as it proved reflected the views and purposes of the other co-operating Governments all our efforts have been directed toward ending the anomalous situation in China by negotiations for a settlement at the earliest possible moment. As soon as the sacred duty of relieving our legation and its dependents was accomplished we withdrew from active hostilities leaving our legation under an adequate guard in Peking as a channel of negotiation and settlement--a course adopted by others of the interested powers. Overtures of the empowered representatives of the Chinese Emperor have been considerately entertained. The Russian proposition looking to the restoration of the Imperial power in Peking has been accepted as in full consonance with our own desires for we have held and hold that effective reparation for wrongs suffered and an enduring settlement that will make their recurrence impossible can best be brought about under an authority which the Chinese nation reverences and obeys. While so doing we forego no jot of our undoubted right to exact exemplary and deterrent punishment of the responsible authors and abettors of the criminal acts whereby we and other nations have suffered grievous injury. For the real culprits the evil counselors who have misled the Imperial judgment and diverted the sovereign authority to their own guilty ends full expiation becomes imperative within the rational limits of retributive Justice. Regarding this as the initial condition of an acceptable settlement between China and the powers I said in my message of October 18 to the Chinese Emperor: I trust that negotiations may begin so soon as we and the other offended Governments shall be effectively satisfied of Your Majesty's ability and power to treat with just sternness the principal offenders who are doubly culpable not alone toward the foreigners but toward Your Majesty under whose rule the purpose of China to dwell in concord with the world had hitherto found expression in the welcome and protection assured to strangers. Taking as a point of departure the Imperial edict appointing Earl Li Hung Chang and Prince Ching plenipotentiaries to arrange a settlement and the edict of September 25 whereby certain high officials were designated for punishment this Government has moved in concert with the other powers toward the opening of negotiations which Mr. Conger assisted by Mr. Rockhill has been authorized to conduct on behalf of the United States. General bases of negotiation formulated by the Government of the French Republic have been accepted with certain reservations as to details made necessary by our own circumstances but like similar reservations by other powers open to discussion in the progress of the negotiations. The disposition of the Emperor's Government to admit liability for wrongs done to foreign Governments and their nationals and to act upon such additional designation of the guilty persons as the foreign ministers at Peking may be in a position to make gives hope of a complete settlement of all questions involved assuring foreign rights of residence and intercourse on terms of equality for all the world. I regard as one of the essential factors of a durable adjustment the securement of adequate guarantees for liberty of faith since insecurity of those natives who may embrace alien creeds is a scarcely less effectual assault upon the rights of foreign worship and teaching than would be the direct invasion thereof. The matter of indemnity for our wronged citizens is a question of grave concern. Measured in money alone a sufficient reparation may prove to be beyond the ability of China to meet. All the powers concur in emphatic disclaimers of any purpose of aggrandizement through the dismemberment of the Empire. I am disposed to think that due compensation may be made in part by increased guarantees of security for foreign rights and immunities and most important of all by the opening of China to the equal commerce of all the world. These views have been and will be earnestly advocated by our representatives. The Government of Russia has put forward a suggestion that in the event of protracted divergence of views in regard to indemnities the matter may be relegated to the Court of Arbitration at The Hague. I favorably incline to this believing that high tribunal could not fail to reach a solution no less conducive to the stability and enlarged prosperity of China itself than immediately beneficial to the powers. Ratifications of a treaty of extradition with the Argentine Republic were exchanged on June 2 last. While the Austro-Hungarian Government has in the many cases that have been reported of the arrest of our naturalized citizens for alleged evasion of military service faithfully observed the provisions of the treaty and released such persons from military obligations it has in some instances expelled those whose presence in the community of their origin was asserted to have a pernicious influence. Representations have been made against this course whenever its adoption has appeared unduly onerous. We have been urgently solicited by Belgium to ratify the International Convention of June 1899 amendatory of the previous Convention of 1890 in respect to the regulation of the liquor trade in Africa. Compliance was necessarily withheld in the absence of the advice and consent of the Senate thereto. The principle involved has the cordial sympathy of this Government which in the reversionary negotiations advocated more drastic measures and I would gladly see its extension by international agreement to the restriction of the liquor traffic with all. uncivilized peoples especially in the Western Pacific. A conference will be held at Brussels December 11 1900 under the Convention for the protection of industrial property concluded at Paris March 20 1883 to which delegates from this country have been appointed. Any lessening of the difficulties that our inventors encounter in obtaining patents abroad for their inventions and that our farmers manufacturers and merchants may have in the protection of their trade-marks is worthy of careful consideration and your attention will be called to the results of the conference at the proper time. In the interest of expanding trade between this country and South America efforts have been made during the past year to conclude conventions with the southern republics for the enlargement of postal facilities. Two such agreements signed with Bolivia on April 24 of which that establishing the money-order system is undergoing certain changes suggested by the Post-Office Department have not yet been ratified by this Government. A treaty of extradition with that country signed on the same day is before the Senate. A boundary dispute between Brazil and Bolivia over the territory of Acre is in a fair way of friendly adjustment a protocol signed in December 1899 having agreed on a definite frontier and provided for its demarcation by a joint commission. Conditions in Brazil have weighed heavily on our export trade to that country in marked contrast to the favorable conditions upon which Brazilian products are admitted into our markets. Urgent representations have been made to that Government on the subject and some amelioration has been effected. We rely upon the reciprocal justice and good will of that Government to assure to us a further improvement in our commercial relations. The Convention signed May 24 1897 for the final settlement of claims left in abeyance upon the dissolution of the Commission of 1893 was at length ratified by the Chilean Congress and the supplemental Commission has been organized. It remains for the Congress to appropriate for the necessary expenses of the Commission. The insurrectionary movement which disturbed Colombia in the latter part of 1899 has been practically suppressed although guerrillas still operate in some departments. The executive power of that Republic changed hands in August last by the act of Vice-President Marroquin in assuming the reins of government during the absence of President San Clemente from the capital. The change met with no serious opposition and following the precedents in such cases the United States minister entered into relations with the new defacto Government on September 17. It is gratifying to announce that the residual questions between Costa Rica and Nicaragua growing out of the Award of President Cleveland in 1888 have been adjusted through the choice of an American engineer General E. P. Alexander as umpire to run the disputed line. His task has been accomplished to the satisfaction of both contestants. A revolution in the Dominican Republic toward the close of last year resulted in the installation of President Jimenez whose Government was formally recognized in January. Since then final payment has been made of the American claim in regard to the Ozama bridge. The year of the exposition has been fruitful in occasions for displaying the good will that exists between this country and France. This great competition brought together from every nation the best in natural productions industry science and the arts submitted in generous rivalry to a judgment made all the more searching because of that rivalry. The extraordinary increase of exportations from this country during the past three years and the activity with which our inventions and wares bad invaded new markets caused much interest to center upon the American exhibit and every encouragement was offered in the way of space and facilities to permit of its being comprehensive as a whole and complete in every part. It was however not an easy task to assemble exhibits that could fitly illustrate our diversified resources and manufactures. Singularly enough our national prosperity lessened. the incentive to exhibit. The dealer in raw materials knew that the user must come to him; the great factories were contented with the phenomenal demand for their output not alone at home but also abroad where merit had already won a profitable trade. Appeals had to be made to the patriotism of exhibitors to induce them to incur outlays promising no immediate return. This was especially the case where it became needful to complete an industrial sequence or illustrate a class of processes. One manufacturer after another had to be visited and importuned and at times after a promise to exhibit in a particular section bad been obtained it would be withdrawn owing to pressure of trade orders and a new quest would have to be made. The installation of exhibits too encountered many obstacles and involved unexpected cost. The exposition was far from ready at the date fixed for its opening. The French transportation lines were congested with offered freight. Belated goods had to be hastily installed in unfinished quarters with whatever labor could be obtained in the prevailing confusion. Nor was the task of the Commission lightened by the fact that owing to the scheme of classification adopted it was impossible to have the entire exhibit of any one country in the same building or more than one group of exhibits in the same part of any building. Our installations were scattered on both sides of the Seine and in widely remote suburbs of Paris so that additional assistants were needed for the work of supervision and arrangement. Despite all these drawbacks the contribution of the United States was not only the largest foreign display but was among the earliest in place and the most orderly in arrangement. Our exhibits were shown in one hundred and one out of one hundred and twenty-one classes and more completely covered the entire classification than those of any other nation. In total number they ranked next after those of France and the attractive form in which they were presented secured general attention. A criterion of the extent and success of our participation and of the thoroughness with which our exhibits were organized is seen in the awards granted to American exhibitors by the international jury namely grand prizes 240; gold medals 597; silver medals 776; bronze medals 541 and honorable mentions 322 -- 2476 in all being the greatest total number given to the exhibit of any exhibiting nation as well as the largest number in each grade. This significant recognition of merit in competition with the chosen exhibits of all other nations and at the hands of juries almost wholly made tip of representatives of France and other competing countries is not only most gratifying but is especially valuable since it sets us to the front in international questions of supply and demand while the large proportion of awards in the classes of art and artistic manufactures afforded unexpected proof of the stimulation of national culture by t
