To the Senate and House of Representatives: The country is to be congratulated on the amount of substantial achievement which has marked the past year both as regards our foreign and as regards our domestic policy. With a nation as with a man the most important things are those of the household and therefore the country is especially to be congratulated on what has been accomplished in the direction of providing for the exercise of supervision over the great corporations and combinations of corporations engaged in interstate commerce. The Congress has created the Department of Commerce and Labor including the Bureau of Corporations with for the first time authority to secure proper publicity of such proceedings of these great corporations as the public has the right to know. It has provided for the expediting of suits for the enforcement of the Federal anti-trust law; and by another law it has secured equal treatment to all producers in the transportation of their goods thus taking a long stride forward in making effective the work of the Interstate Commerce Commission. The establishment of the Department of Commerce and Labor with the Bureau of Corporations thereunder marks a real advance in the direction of doing all that is possible for the solution of the questions vitally affecting capitalists and wage-workers. The act creating Department was approved on February 14 1903 and two days later the head of the Department was nominated and confirmed by the Senate. Since then the work of organization has been pushed as rapidly as the initial appropriations permitted and with due regard to thoroughness and the broad purposes which the Department is designed to serve. After the transfer of the various bureaus and branches to the Department at the beginning of the current fiscal year as provided for in the act the personnel comprised 1289 employees in Washington and 8836 in the country at large. The scope of the Department's duty and authority embraces the commercial and industrial interests of the Nation. It is not designed to restrict or control the fullest liberty of legitimate business action but to secure exact and authentic information which will aid the Executive in enforcing existing laws and which will enable the Congress to enact additional legislation if any should be found necessary in order to prevent the few from obtaining privileges at the expense of diminished opportunities for the many. The preliminary work of the Bureau of Corporations in the Department has shown the wisdom of its creation. Publicity in corporate affairs will tend to do away with ignorance and will afford facts upon which intelligent action may be taken. Systematic intelligent investigation is already developing facts the knowledge of which is essential to a right understanding of the needs and duties of the business world. The corporation which is honestly and fairly organized whose managers in the conduct of its business recognize their obligation to deal squarely with their stockholders their competitors and the public has nothing to fear from such supervision. The purpose of this Bureau is not to embarrass or assail legitimate business but to aid in bringing about a better industrial condition--a condition under which there shall be obedience to law and recognition of public obligation by all corporations great or small. The Department of Commerce and Labor will be not only the clearing house for information regarding the business transactions of the Nation but the executive arm of the Government to aid in strengthening our domestic and foreign markets in perfecting our transportation facilities in building up our merchant marine in preventing the entrance of undesirable immigrants in improving commercial and industrial conditions and in bringing together on common ground those necessary partners in industrial progress--capital and labor. Commerce between the nations is steadily growing in volume and the tendency of the times is toward closer trade relations. Constant watchfulness is needed to secure to Americans the chance to participate to the best advantage in foreign trade; and we may confidently expect that the new Department will justify the expectation of its creators by the exercise of this watchfulness as well as by the businesslike administration of such laws relating to our internal affairs as are intrusted to its care. In enacting the laws above enumerated the Congress proceeded on sane and conservative lines. Nothing revolutionary was attempted; but a common-sense and successful effort was made in the direction of seeing that corporations are so handled as to subserve the public good. The legislation was moderate. It was characterized throughout by the idea that we were not attacking corporations but endeavoring to provide for doing away with any evil in them; that we drew the line against misconduct not against wealth; gladly recognizing the great good done by the capitalist who alone or in conjunction with his fellows does his work along proper and legitimate lines. The purpose of the legislation which purpose will undoubtedly be fulfilled was to favor such a man when he does well and to supervise his action only to prevent him from doing ill. Publicity can do no harm to the honest corporation. The only corporation that has cause to dread it is the corporation which shrinks from the light and about the welfare of such corporations we need not be oversensitive. The work of the Department of Commerce and Labor has been conditioned upon this theory of securing fair treatment alike for labor and for capital. The consistent policy of the National Government so far as it has the power is to hold in check the unscrupulous man whether employer or employee; but to refuse to weaken individual initiative or to hamper or cramp the industrial development of the country. We recognize that this is an era of federation and combination in which great capitalistic corporations and labor unions have become factors of tremendous importance in all industrial centers. Hearty recognition is given the far-reaching beneficent work which has been accomplished through both corporations and unions and the line as between different corporations as between different unions is drawn as it is between different individuals; that is it is drawn on conduct the effort being to treat both organized capital and organized labor alike; asking nothing save that the interest of each shall be brought into harmony with the interest of the general public and that the conduct of each shall conform to the fundamental rules of obedience to law of individual freedom and of justice and fair dealing towards all. Whenever either corporation labor union or individual disregards the law or acts in a spirit of arbitrary and tyrannous interference with the rights of others whether corporations or individuals then where the Federal Government has jurisdiction it will see to it that the misconduct is stopped paying not the slightest heed to the position or power of the corporation the union or the individual but only to one vital fact--that is the question whether or not the conduct of the individual or aggregate of individuals is in accordance with the law of the land. Every man must be guaranteed his liberty and his right to do as he likes with his property or his labor so long as he does not infringe the rights of others. No man is above the law and no man is below it; nor do we ask any man's permission when we require him to obey it. Obedience to the law is demanded as a right; not asked as a favor. We have cause as a nation to be thankful for the steps that have been so successfully taken to put these principles into effect. The progress has been by evolution not by revolution. Nothing radical has been done; the action has been both moderate and resolute. Therefore the work will stand. There shall be no backward step. If in the working of the laws it proves desirable that they shall at any point be expanded or amplified the amendment can be made as its desirability is shown. Meanwhile they are being administered with judgment but with insistence upon obedience to them and their need has been emphasized in signal fashion by the events of the past year. From all sources exclusive of the postal service the receipts of the Government for the last fiscal year aggregated $560396674. The expenditures for the same period were $506099007 the surplus for the fiscal year being $54297667. The indications are that the surplus for the present fiscal year will be very small if indeed there be any surplus. From July to November the receipts from customs were approximately nine million dollars less than the receipts from the same source for a corresponding portion of last year. Should this decrease continue at the same ratio throughout the fiscal year the surplus would be reduced by approximately thirty million dollars. Should the revenue from customs suffer much further decrease during the fiscal year the surplus would vanish. A large surplus is certainly undesirable. Two years ago the war taxes were taken off with the express intention of equalizing the governmental receipts and expenditures and though the first year thereafter still showed a surplus it now seems likely that a substantial equality of revenue and expenditure will be attained. Such being the case it is of great moment both to exercise care and economy in appropriations and to scan sharply any change in our fiscal revenue system which may reduce our income. The need of strict economy in our expenditures is emphasized by the fact that we can not afford to be parsimonious in providing for what is essential to our national well-being. Careful economy wherever possible will alone prevent our income from falling below the point required in order to meet our genuine needs. The integrity of our currency is beyond question and under present conditions it would be unwise and unnecessary to attempt a reconstruction of our entire monetary system. The same liberty should be granted the Secretary of the Treasury to deposit customs receipts as is granted him in the deposit of receipts from other sources. In my Message of December 2 1902 I called attention to certain needs of the financial situation and I again ask the consideration of the Congress for these questions. During the last session of the Congress at the suggestion of a joint note from the Republic of Mexico and the Imperial Government of China and in harmony with an act of the Congress appropriating $25000 to pay the expenses thereof a commission was appointed to confer with the principal European countries in the hope that some plan might be devised whereby a fixed rate of exchange could be assured between the gold-standard countries and the silver-standard countries. This commission has filed its preliminary report which has been made public. I deem it important that the commission be continued and that a sum of money be appropriated sufficient to pay the expenses of its further labors. A majority of our people desire that steps be taken in the interests of American shipping so that we may once more resume our former position in the ocean carrying trade. But hitherto the differences of opinion as to the proper method of reaching this end have been so wide that it has proved impossible to secure the adoption of any particular scheme. Having in view these facts I recommend that the Congress direct the Secretary of the Navy the Postmaster-General and the Secretary of Commerce and Labor associated with such a representation from the Senate and House of Representatives as the Congress in its wisdom may designate to serve as a commission for the purpose of investigating and reporting to the Congress at its next session what legislation is desirable or necessary for the development of the American merchant marine and American commerce and incidentally of a national ocean mail service of adequate auxiliary naval crusiers and naval reserves. While such a measure is desirable in any event it is especially desirable at this time in view of the fact that our present governmental contract for ocean mail with the American Line will expire in 1905. Our ocean mail act was passed in 1891. In 1895 our 20-knot transatlantic mail line was equal to any foreign line. Since then the Germans have put on 23-knot steamers and the British have contracted for 24-knot steamers. Our service should equal the best. If it does not the commercial public will abandon it. If we are to stay in the business it ought to be with a full understanding of the advantages to the country on one hand and on the other with exact knowledge of the cost and proper methods of carrying it on. Moreover lines of cargo ships are of even more importance than fast mail lines; save so far as the latter can be depended upon to furnish swift auxiliary cruisers in time of war. The establishment of new lines of cargo ships to South America to Asia and elsewhere would be much in the interest of our commercial expansion. We can not have too much immigration of the right kind and we should have none at all of the wrong kind. The need is to devise some system by which undesirable immigrants shall be kept out entirely while desirable immigrants are properly distributed throughout the country. At present some districts which need immigrants have none; and in others where the population is already congested immigrants come in such numbers as to depress the conditions of life for those already there. During the last two years the immigration service at New York has been greatly improved and the corruption and inefficiency which formerly obtained there have been eradicated. This service has just been investigated by a committee of New York citizens of high standing Messrs. Arthur V. Briesen Lee K. Frankel Eugene A. Philbin Thomas W. Hynes and Ralph Trautman. Their report deals with the whole situation at length and concludes with certain recommendations for administrative and legislative action. It is now receiving the attention of the Secretary of Commerce and Labor. The special investigation of the subject of naturalization under the direction of the Attorney-General and the consequent prosecutions reveal a condition of affairs calling for the immediate attention of the Congress. Forgeries and perjuries of shameless and flagrant character have been perpetrated not only in the dense centers of population but throughout the country; and it is established beyond doubt that very many so-called citizens of the United States have no title whatever to that right and are asserting and enjoying the benefits of the same through the grossest frauds. It is never to be forgotten that citizenship is to quote the words recently used by the Supreme Court of the United States an "inestimable heritage" whether it proceeds from birth within the country or is obtained by naturalization; and we poison the sources of our national character and strength at the fountain if the privilege is claimed and exercised without right and by means of fraud and corruption. The body politic can not be sound and healthy if many of its constituent members claim their standing through the prostitution of the high right and calling of citizenship. It should mean something to become a citizen of the United States; and in the process no loophole whatever should be left open to fraud. The methods by which these frauds--now under full investigation with a view to meting out punishment and providing adequate remedies--are perpetrated include many variations of procedure by which false certificates of citizenship are forged in their entirety; or genuine certificates fraudulently or collusively obtained in blank are filled in by the criminal conspirators; or certificates are obtained on fraudulent statements as to the time of arrival and residence in this country; or imposition and substitution of another party for the real petitioner occur in court; or certificates are made the subject of barter and sale and transferred from the rightful holder to those not entitled to them; or certificates are forged by erasure of the original names and the insertion of the names of other persons not entitled to the same. It is not necessary for me to refer here at large to the causes leading to this state of affairs. The desire for naturalization is heartily to be commended where it springs from a sincere and permanent intention to become citizens and a real appreciation of the privilege. But it is a source of untold evil and trouble where it is traceable to selfish and dishonest motives such as the effort by artificial and improper means in wholesale fashion to create voters who are ready-made tools of corrupt politicians or the desire to evade certain labor laws creating discriminations against alien labor. All good citizens whether naturalized or native born are equally interested in protecting our citizenship against fraud in any form and on the other hand in affording every facility for naturalization to those who in good faith desire to share alike our privileges and our responsibilities. The Federal grand jury lately in session in New York City dealt with this subject and made a presentment which states the situation briefly and forcibly and contains important suggestions for the consideration of the Congress. This presentment is included as an appendix to the report of the Attorney-General. In my last annual Message in connection with the subject of the due regulation of combinations of capital which are or may become injurious to the public I recommend a special appropriation for the better enforcement of the antitrust law as it now stands to be extended under the direction of the Attorney-General. Accordingly (by the legislative executive and judicial appropriation act of February 25 1903 32 Stat. 854 904) the Congress appropriated for the purpose of enforcing the various Federal trust and interstate-commerce laws the sum of five hundred thousand dollars to be expended under the direction of the Attorney-General in the employment of special counsel and agents in the Department of Justice to conduct proceedings and prosecutions under said laws in the courts of the United States. I now recommend as a matter of the utmost importance and urgency the extension of the purposes of this appropriation so that it may be available under the direction of the Attorney-General and until used for the due enforcement of the laws of the United States in general and especially of the civil and criminal laws relating to public lands and the laws relating to postal crimes and offenses and the subject of naturalization. Recent investigations have shown a deplorable state of affairs in these three matters of vital concern. By various frauds and by forgeries and perjuries thousands of acres of the public domain embracing lands of different character and extending through various sections of the country have been dishonestly acquired. It is hardly necessary to urge the importance of recovering these dishonest acquisitions stolen from the people and of promptly and duly punishing the offenders. I speak in another part of this Message of the widespread crimes by which the sacred right of citizenship is falsely asserted and that "inestimable heritage" perverted to base ends. By similar means--that is through frauds forgeries and perjuries and by shameless briberies--the laws relating to the proper conduct of the public service in general and to the due administration of the Post-Office Department have been notoriously violated and many indictments have been found and the consequent prosecutions are in course of hearing or on the eve thereof. For the reasons thus indicated and so that the Government may be prepared to enforce promptly and with the greatest effect the due penalties for such violations of law and to this end may be furnished with sufficient instrumentalities and competent legal assistance for the investigations and trials which will be necessary at many different points of the country I urge upon the Congress the necessity of making the said appropriation available for immediate use for all such purposes to be expended under the direction of the Attorney-General. Steps have been taken by the State Department looking to the making of bribery an extraditable offense with foreign powers. The need of more effective treaties covering this crime is manifest. The exposures and prosecutions of official corruption in St. Louis Mo. and other cities and States have resulted in a number of givers and takers of bribes becoming fugitives in foreign lands. Bribery has not been included in extradition treaties heretofore as the necessity for it has not arisen. While there may have been as much official corruption in former years there has been more developed and brought to light in the immediate past than in the preceding century of our country's history. It should be the policy of the United States to leave no place on earth where a corrupt man fleeing from this country can rest in peace. There is no reason why bribery should not be included in all treaties as extraditable. The recent amended treaty with Mexico whereby this crime was put in the list of extraditable offenses has established a salutary precedent in this regard. Under this treaty the State Department has asked and Mexico has granted the extradition of one of the St. Louis bribe givers. There can be no crime more serious than bribery. Other offenses violate one law while corruption strikes at the foundation of all law. Under our form of Government all authority is vested in the people and by them delegated to those who represent them in official capacity. There can be no offense heavier than that of him in whom such a sacred trust has been reposed who sells it for his own gain and enrichment; and no less heavy is the offense of the bribe giver. He is worse than the thief for the thief robs the individual while the corrupt official plunders an entire city or State. He is as wicked as the murderer for the murderer may only take one life against the law while the corrupt official and the man who corrupts the official alike aim at the assassination of the commonwealth itself. Government of the people by the people for the people will perish from the face of the earth if bribery is tolerated. The givers and takers of bribes stand on an evil pre-eminence of infamy. The exposure and punishment of public corruption is an honor to a nation not a disgrace. The shame lies in toleration not in correction. No city or State still less the Nation can be injured by the enforcement of law. As long as public plunderers when detected can find a haven of refuge in any foreign land and avoid punishment just so long encouragement is given them to continue their practices. If we fail to do all that in us lies to stamp out corruption we can not escape our share of responsibility for the guilt. The first requisite of successful self-government is unflinching enforcement of the law and the cutting out of corruption. For several years past the rapid development of Alaska and the establishment of growing American interests in regions theretofore unsurveyed and imperfectly known brought into prominence the urgent necessity of a practical demarcation of the boundaries between the jurisdictions of the United States and Great Britain. Although the treaty of 1825 between Great Britain and Russia the provisions of which were copied in the treaty of 1867 whereby Russia conveyed Alaska to the United States was positive as to the control first by Russia and later by the United States of a strip of territory along the continental mainland from the western shore of Portland Canal to Mount St. Elias following and surrounding the indentations of the coast and including the islands to the westward its description of the landward margin of the strip was indefinite resting on the supposed existence of a continuous ridge or range of mountains skirting the coast as figured in the charts of the early navigators. It had at no time been possible for either party in interest to lay down under the authority of the treaty a line so obviously exact according to its provisions as to command the assent of the other. For nearly three-fourths of a century the absence of tangible local interests demanding the exercise of positive jurisdiction on either side of the border left the question dormant. In 1878 questions of revenue administration on the Stikine River led to the establishment of a provisional demarcation crossing the channel between two high peaks on either side about twenty-four miles above the river mouth. In 1899 similar questions growing out of the extraordinary development of mining interests in the region about the head of Lynn Canal brought about a temporary modus vivendi by which a convenient separation was made at the watershed divides of the White and Chilkoot passes and to the north of Klukwan on the Klehini River. These partial and tentative adjustments could not in the very nature of things be satisfactory or lasting. A permanent disposition of the matter became imperative. After unavailing attempts to reach an understanding through a Joint High Commission followed by prolonged negotiations conducted in an amicable spirit a convention between the United States and Great Britain was signed January 24 1903 providing for an examination of the subject by a mixed tribunal of six members three on a side with a view to its final disposition. Ratifications were exchanged on March 3 last whereupon the two Governments appointed their respective members. Those on behalf of the United States were Elihu Root Secretary of War Henry Cabot Lodge a Senator of the United States and George Turner an ex-Senator of the United States while Great Britain named the Right Honourable Lord Alverstone Lord Chief Justice of England Sir Louis Amable Jette K. C. M. G. retired judge of the Supreme Court of Quebec and A. B. Aylesworth K. C. of Toronto. This Tribunal met in London on September 3 under the Presidency of Lord Alverstone. The proceedings were expeditious and marked by a friendly and conscientious spirit. The respective cases counter cases and arguments presented the issues clearly and fully. On the 20th of October a majority of the Tribunal reached and signed an agreement on all the questions submitted by the terms of the Convention. By this award the right of the United States to the control of a continuous strip or border of the mainland shore skirting all the tide-water inlets and sinuosities of the coast is confirmed; the entrance to Portland Canal (concerning which legitimate doubt appeared) is defined as passing by Tongass Inlet and to the northwestward of Wales and Pearse islands; a line is drawn from the head of Portland Canal to the fifty-sixth degree of north latitude; and the interior border line of the strip is fixed by lines connecting certain mountain summits lying between Portland Canal and Mount St. Elias and running along the crest of the divide separating the coast slope from the inland watershed at the only part of the frontier where the drainage ridge approaches the coast within the distance of ten marine leagues stipulated by the treaty as the extreme width of the strip around the heads of Lynn Canal and its branches. While the line so traced follows the provisional demarcation of 1878 at the crossing of the Stikine River and that of 1899 at the summits of the White and Chilkoot passes it runs much farther inland from the Klehini than the temporary line of the later modus vivendi and leaves the entire mining district of the Porcupine River and Glacier Creek within the jurisdiction of the United States. The result is satisfactory in every way. It is of great material advantage to our people in the Far Northwest. It has removed from the field of discussion and possible danger a question liable to become more acutely accentuated with each passing year. Finally it has furnished a signal proof of the fairness and good will with which two friendly nations can approach and determine issues involving national sovereignty and by their nature incapable of submission to a third power for adjudication. The award is self-executing on the vital points. To make it effective as regards the others it only remains for the two Governments to appoint each on its own behalf one or more scientific experts who shall with all convenient speed proceed together to lay down the boundary line in accordance with the decision of the majority of the Tribunal. I recommend that the Congress make adequate provision for the appointment compensation and expenses of the members to serve on this joint boundary commission on the part of the United States. It will be remembered that during the second session of the last Congress Great Britain Germany and Italy formed an alliance for the purpose of blockading the ports of Venezuela and using such other means of pressure as would secure a settlement of claims due as they alleged to certain of their subjects. Their employment of force for the collection of these claims was terminated by an agreement brought about through the offices of the diplomatic representatives of the United States at Caracas and the Government at Washington thereby ending a situation which was bound to cause increasing friction and which jeoparded the peace of the continent. Under this agreement Venezuela agreed to set apart a certain percentage of the customs receipts of two of her ports to be applied to the payment of whatever obligations might be ascertained by mixed commissions appointed for that purpose to be due from her not only to the three powers already mentioned whose proceedings against her had resulted in a state of war but also to the United States France Spain Belgium the Netherlands Sweden and Norway and Mexico who had not employed force for the collection of the claims alleged to be due to certain of their citizens. A demand was then made by the so-called blockading powers that the sums ascertained to be due to their citizens by such mixed commissions should be accorded payment in full before anything was paid upon the claims of any of the so-called peace powers. Venezuela on the other hand insisted that all her creditors should be paid upon a basis of exact equality. During the efforts to adjust this dispute it was suggested by the powers in interest that it should be referred to me for decision but I was clearly of the opinion that a far wiser course would be to submit the question to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. It seemed to me to offer an admirable opportunity to advance the practice of the peaceful settlement of disputes between nations and to secure for the Hague Tribunal a memorable increase of its practical importance. The nations interested in the controversy were so numerous and in many instances so powerful as to make it evident that beneficent results would follow from their appearance at the same time before the bar of that august tribunal of peace. Our hopes in that regard have been realized. Russia and Austria are represented in the persons of the learned and distinguished jurists who compose the Tribunal while Great Britain Germany France Spain Italy Belgium the Netherlands Sweden and Norway Mexico the United States and Venezuela are represented by their respective agents and counsel. Such an imposing concourse of nations presenting their arguments to and invoking the decision of that high court of international justice and international peace can hardly fail to secure a like submission of many future controversies. The nations now appearing there will find it far easier to appear there a second time while no nation can imagine its just pride will be lessened by following the example now presented. This triumph of the principle of international arbitration is a subject of warm congratulation and offers a happy augury for the peace of the world. There seems good ground for the belief that there has been a real growth among the civilized nations of a sentiment which will permit a gradual substitution of other methods than the method of war in the settlement of disputes. It is not pretended that as yet we are near a position in which it will be possible wholly to prevent war or that a just regard for national interest and honor will in all cases permit of the settlement of international disputes by arbitration ;. but by a mixture of prudence and firmness with wisdom we think it is possible to do away with much of the provocation and excuse for war and at least in many cases to substitute some other and more rational method for the settlement of disputes. The Hague 
