QUINCY HOWE MODERATOR: I am Quincy Howe of ABC News saying good evening from New York where the two major candidates for president of the United States are about to engage in their fourth radio-television discussion of the present campaign. Tonight these men will confine that discussion to foreign policy. Good evening Vice President Nixon. MR. NIXON: Good evening Mr. Howe. MR. HOWE: And good evening Senator Kennedy. MR. KENNEDY: Good evening Mr. Howe. MR. HOWE: Now let me read the rules and conditions under which the candidates themselves have agreed to proceed. As they did in their first meeting both men will make opening statements of about eight minutes each and closing statements of equal time running three to five minutes each. During the half hour between the opening and closing statements the candidates will answer and comment upon questions from a panel of four correspondents chosen by the nationwide networks that carry the program. Each candidate will be questioned in turn with opportunity for comment by the other. Each answer will be limited to two and one-half minutes each comment to one and one-half minutes. The correspondents are free to ask any questions they choose in the field of foreign affairs. Neither candidate knows what questions will be asked. Time alone will determine the final question. Reversing the order in their first meeting Senator Kennedy will make the second opening statement and the first closing statement. For the first opening statement here is Vice President Nixon. MR. NIXON: Mr. Howe Senator Kennedy my fellow Americans. Since this campaign began I have had a very rare privilege. I have traveled to forty-eight of the fifty states and in my travels I have learned what the people of the United States are thinking about. There is one issue that stands out above all the rest one in which every American is concerned regardless of what group he may be a member and regardless of where he may live. And that issue very simply stated is this: how can we keep the peace - keep it without surrender? How can we extend freedom - extend it without war? Now in determining how we deal with this issue we must find the answer to a very important but simple question: who threatens the peace? Who threatens freedom in the world? There is only one threat to peace and one threat to freedom - that that is presented by the international Communist movement. And therefore if we are to have peace we must know how to deal with the Communists and their leaders. I know Mr. Khrushchev. I also have had the opportunity of knowing and meeting other Communist leaders in the world. I believe there are certain principles we must find in dealing with him and his colleagues - principles if followed that will keep the peace and that also can extend freedom. First we have to learn from the past because we cannot afford to make the mistakes of the past. In the seven years before this Administration came into power in Washington we found that six hundred million people went behind the Iron Curtain. And at the end of that seven years we were engaged in a war in Korea which cost of thirty thousand American lives. In the past seven years in President Eisenhower's Administration this situation has been reversed. We ended the Korean War; by strong firm leadership we have kept out of other wars; and we have avoided surrender of principle or territory at the conference table. Now why were we successful as our predecessors were not successful? I think there're several reasons. In the first place they made a fatal error in misjudging the Communists; in trying to apply to them the same rules of conduct that you would apply to the leaders of the free world. One of the major errors they made was the one that led to the Korean War. In ruling out the defense of Korea they invited aggression in that area. They thought they were going to have peace - it brought war. We learned from their mistakes. And so in our seven years we find that we have been firm in our diplomacy; we have never made concessions without getting concessions in return. We have always been willing to go the extra mile to negotiate for disarmament or in any other area. But we have never been willing to do anything that in effect surrendered freedom any place in the world. That is why President Eisenhower was correct in not apologizing or expressing regrets to Mr. Khrushchev at the Paris Conference as Senator Kennedy suggested he could have done. That is why Senator wh- President Eisenhower was also correct in his policy in the Formosa Straits where he declined and refused to follow the recommendations - recommendations which Senator Kennedy voted for in 1955; again made in 1959; again repeated in his debates that you have heard - recommendations with regard to - again - slicing off a piece of free territory and abandoning it if - in effect to the Communists. Why did the President feel this was wrong and why was the President right and his critics wrong? Because again this showed a lack of understanding of dictators a lack of understanding particularly of Communists because every time you make such a concession it does not lead to peace; it only encourages them to blackmail you. It encourages them to begin a war. And so I say that the record shows that we know how to keep the peace to keep it without surrender. Let us move now to the future. It is not enough to stand on this record because we are dealing with the most ruthless fanatical... leaders that the world has ever seen. That is why I say that in this period of the sixties America must move forward in every area. First of all although we are today as Senator Kennedy has admitted the strongest nation in the world militarily we must increase our strength increase it so that we will always have enough strength that regardless of what our potential opponents have - if the should launch a surprise attack - we will be able to destroy their war-making capability. They must know in other words that it is national suicide if they begin anything. We need this kind of strength because we're the guardians of the peace. In addition to military strength we need to see that the economy of this country continues to grow. It has grown in the past seven years. It can and will grow even more in the next four. And the reason that it must grow even more is because we have things to do at home and also because we're in a race for survival - a race in which it isn't enough to be ahead; it isn't enough simply to be complacent. We have to move ahead in order to stay ahead. And that is why in this field I have made recommendations which I am confident will move the American economy ahead - move it firmly and soundly so that there will never be a time when the Soviet Union will be able to challenge our superiority in this field. And so we need military strength we need economic strength we also need the right diplomatic policies. What are they? Again we turn to the past. Firmness but no belligerence and by no belligerence I mean that we do not answer insult by insult. When you are proud and confident of your strength you do not get down to the level of Mr. Khrushchev and his colleagues. And that example that President Eisenhower has set we will continue to follow. But all this by itself is not enough. It is not enough for us simply to be the strongest nation militarily the strongest economically and also to have firm diplomacy. We must have a great goal. And that is: not just to keep freedom for ourselves but to extend it to all the world to extend it to all the world because that is America's destiny. To extend it to all the world because the Communist aim is not to hold their own but to extend Communism. And you cannot fight a victory for Communism or a strategy of victory for Communism with the strategy simply of holding the line. And so I say that we believe that our policies of military strength of economic strength of diplomatic firmness first will keep the peace and keep it without surrender. We also believe that in the great field of ideals that we can lead America to the victory for freedom - victory in the newly developing countries victory also in the captive countries - provided we have faith in ourselves and faith in our principles. MR. HOWE: Now the opening statement of Senator Kennedy. MR. KENNEDY: Mr. Howe Mr. Vice President. First uh - let me again try to correct the record on the matter of Quemoy and Matsu. I voted for the Formosa resolution in 1955. I have sustained it since then. I've said that I agree with the Administration policy. Mr. Nixon earlier indicated that he would defend Quemoy and Matsu even if the attack on these islands two miles off the coast of China were not part of a general attack an Formosa and the Pescadores. I indicated that I would defend those islands if the attack were directed against Pescadores and Formosa which is part of the Eisenhower policy. I've supported that policy. In the last week as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee I have re-read the testimony of General Twining representing the Administration in 1959 and the Assistant Secretary of State before the Foreign Relations Committee in 1958 and I have accurately described the Administration policy and I support it wholeheartedly. So that really isn't an issue in this campaign. It isn't an issue with Mr. Nixon who now says that he also supports the Eisenhower policy. Nor is the question that all Americans want peace and security an issue in this campaign. The question is: are we moving in the direction of peace and security? Is our relative strength growing? Is as Mr. Nixon says our prestige at an all-time high as he said a week ago and that of the Communists at an all-time low? I don't believe it is. I don't believe that our relative strength is increasing. And I say that not as the Democratic standard-bearer but as a citizen of the United States who is concerned about the United States. I look at Cuba ninety miles off the coast of the United States. In 1957 I was in Havana. I talked to the American Ambassador there. He said that he was the second most powerful man in Cuba. And yet even though Ambassador Smith and Ambassador Gardner both Republican Ambassadors both warned of Castro the Marxist influences around Castro the Communist influences around Castro both of them have testified in the last six weeks that in spite of their warnings to the American government nothing was done. Our d- security depends upon Latin America. Can any American looking at the situation in Latin America feel contented with what's happening today when a candidate for the presidency of Brazil feels it necessary to call - not on Washington during the campaign - but on Castro in Havana in order to pick up the support of the Castro supporters in Brazil? At the American Conference - Inter-American Conference this summer when we wanted them to join together in the denunciation of Castro and the Cuban Communists we couldn't even get the Inter-American group to join together in denouncing Castro. It was rather a vague statement that they finally made. Do you know today that the Com- the Russians broadcast ten times as many programs in Spanish to Latin America as we do? Do you know we don't have a single program sponsored by our government to Cuba - to tell them our story to tell them that we are their friends that we want them to be free again? Africa is now the emerging area of the world. It contains twenty-five percent of all the members of the General Assembly. We didn't even have a Bureau of African Affairs until 1957. In the Africa south of the Sahara which is the major new section we have less students from all of Africa in that area studying under government auspices today than from the country of Thailand. If there's one thing Africa needs it's technical assistance. And yet last year we gave them less than five percent of all the technical assistance funds that we distributed around the world. We relied in the Middle East on the Baghdad Pact and yet when the Iraqi Government was changed the Baghdad Pact broke down. We relied on the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East which passed the Senate. There isn't one country in the Middle East that now endorses the Eisenhower Doctrine. We look to Europe uh - to Asia because the struggle is in the underdeveloped world. Which system Communism or freedom will triumph in the next five or ten years? That's what should concern us not the history of ten or fifteen or twenty years ago. But are we doing enough in these areas? What are freedom's chances in those areas? By 1965 or 1970 will there be other Cubas in Latin America? Will Guinea and Ghana which have now voted with the Communists frequently as newly independent countries of Africa - will there be others? Will the Congo go Communist? Will other countries? Are we doing enough in that area? And what about Asia? Is India going to win the economic struggle or is China going to win it? Who will dominate Asia in the next five or ten years? Communism? The Chinese? Or will freedom? The question which we have to decide as Americans - are we doing enough today? Is our strength and prestige rising? Do people want to be identified with us? Do they want to follow United States leadership? I don't think they do enough. And that's what concerns me. In Africa - these countries that have newly joined the United Nations. On the question of admission of Red China only two countries in all of Africa voted with us - Liberia and the Union of South Africa. The rest either abstained or voted against us. More countries in Asia voted against us on that question than voted with us. I believe that this struggle is going to go on and it may be well decided in the next decade. I have seen Cuba go to the Communists. I have seen Communist influence and Castro influence rise in Latin America. I have seen us ignore Africa. There are six countries in Africa that are members of the United Nations. There isn't a single American diplomatic representative in any of those six. When Guinea became independent the Soviet Ambassador showed up that very day. We didn't recognize them for two months; the American Ambassador didn't show up for nearly eight months. I believe that the world is changing fast. And I don't think this Administration has shown the foresight has shown the knowledge has been identified with the great fight which these people are waging to be free to get a better standard of living to live better. The average income in some of those countries is twenty-five dollars a year. The Communists say "Come with us; look what we've done." And we've been in - on the whole uninterested. I think we're going to have to do better. Mr. Nixon talks about our being the strongest country in the world. I think we are today. But we were far stronger relative to the Communists five years ago and what is of great concern is that the balance of power is in danger of moving with them. They made a breakthrough in missiles and by nineteen sixty-one two and three they will be outnumbering us in missiles. I'm not as confident as he is that we will be the strongest military power by 1963. He talks about economic growth as a great indicator of freedom. I agree with him. What we do in this country the kind of society that we build that will tell whether freedom will be sustained around the world. And yet in the last nine months of this year we've had a drop in our economic growth rather than a gain. We've had the lowest rate of increase of economic growth in the last nine months of any major industrialized society in the world. I look up and see the Soviet flag on the moon. The fact is that the State Department polls on our prestige and influence around the world have shown such a sharp drop that up till now the State Department has been unwilling to release them. And yet they were polled by the U.S.I.A. The point of all this is this is a struggle in which we're engaged. We want peace. We want freedom. We want security. We want to be stronger. We want freedom to gain. But I don't believe in these changing and revolutionary times this Administration has known that the world is changing - has identified itself with that change. I think the Communists have been moving with vigor - Laos Africa Cuba - all around the world today they're on the move. I think we have to revita1ize our society. I think we have to demonstrate to the people of the world that we're determined in this free country of ours to be first - not first if and not first but and not first when - but first. And when we are strong and when we are first then freedom gains; then the prospects for peace increase; then the prospects for our society gain. MR. HOWE: That completes the opening statements. Now the candidates will answer and comment upon questions put by these four correspondents: Frank Singiser of Mutual News John Edwards of ABC News Walter Cronkite of CBS News John Chancellor of NBC News. Frank Singiser has the first question for Vice President Nixon. MR. SINGISER: Mr. Vice President I'd like to pin down the difference between the way you would handle Castro's regime and prevent the establishment of Communist governments in the Western Hemisphere and the way that t Senator Kennedy would proceed. Uh - Vice President Nixon in what important respects do you feel there are differences between you and why do you believe your policy is better for the peace and security of the United States in the Western Hemisphere? MR. NIXON: Our policies are very different. I think that Senator Kennedy's policies and recommendations for the handling of the Castro regime are probably the most dangers- dangerously irresponsible recommendations that he's made during the course of this campaign. In effect what Senator Kennedy recommends is that the United States government should give help to the exiles and to those within Cuba who oppose the Castro regime - provided they are anti-Batista. Now let's just see what this means. We have five treaties with Latin America including the one setting up the Organization of American States in Bogota in 1948 in which we have agreed not to intervene in the internal affairs of any other American country - and they as well have agreed to do likewise. The charter of the United Nations - its Preamble Article I and Article II - also provide that there shall be no intervention by one nation in the internal affairs of another. Now I don't know what Senator Kennedy suggests when he says that we should help those who oppose the Castro regime both in Cuba and without. But I do know this: that if we were to follow that recommendation that we would lose all of our friends in Latin America we would probably be condemned in the United Nations and we would not accomplish our objective. I know something else. It would be an open invitation for Mr. Khrushchev to come in to come into Latin America and to engage us in what would be a civil war and possibly even worse than that. This is the major recommendation that he's made. Now what can we do? Well we can do what we did with Guatemala. There was a Communist dictator that we inherited from the previous Administration. We quarantined Mr. Arbenz. The result was that the Guatemalan people themselves eventually rose up and they threw him out. We are quarantining Mr. Castro today. We're quarantining him diplomatically by bringing back our Ambassador; economically by cutting off trade and Senator Kennedy's suggestion that the trade that we cut off is not significant is just one hundred percent wrong. We are cutting off the significant items that the Cuban regime needs in order to survive. By cutting off trade by cutting off our diplomatic relations as we have we will quarantine this regime so that the people of Cuba themselves will take care of Mr. Castro. But for us to do what Senator Kennedy has suggested would bring results which I know he would not want and certainly which the American people would not want. MR. KENNEDY: Mr. Nixon uh - shows himself i- misinformed. He surely must be aware that most of the equipment and arms and resources for Castro came from the United States flowed out of Florida and other parts of the United States to Castro in the mountains. There isn't any doubt about that number one. Number two I believe that if any economic sanctions against Latin America are going to be successful they have to be multilateral. They have to include the other countries of Latin America. The very minute effect of the action which has been taken this week on Cuba's economy - I believe Castro can replace those markets very easily through Latin America through Europe and through Eastern Europe. If the United States had stronger prestige and influence in Latin America it could persuade - as Franklin Roosevelt did in 1940 - the countries of Latin America to join in an economic quarantine of Castro. That's the only way you can bring real economic pressure on the Castro regime - and also the countries of Western Europe Canada Japan and the others. Number three Castro is only the beginning of our difficulties throughout Latin America. The big struggle will be to prevent the influence of Castro spreading to other countries - Mexico Panama Bolivia Colombia. We're going to have to try to provide closer ties to associate ourselves with the great desire of these people for a better life if we're going to prevent Castro's influence from spreading throughout all of Latin America. His influence is strong enough today to prevent us from joi- getting the other countries of Latin America to join with us in economic quarantine. His influence is growing - mostly because this Administration has ignored Latin America. You yourself said Mr. Vice President a month ago that if we had provided the kind of economic aid five years ago that we are now providing we might never have had Castro. Why didn't we? MR. HOWE: John Edwards has his first question for Senator Kennedy. MR. EDWARDS: Senator Kennedy one test of a new president's leadership will be the caliber of his appointments. It's a matter of interest here and overseas as to who will be the new secretary of state. Now under our rules I must ask this question of you but I would hope that the Vice President also would answer it. Will you give us the names of three or four Americans each of whom if appointed would serve with distinction in your judgment as secretary of state? MR. KENNEDY: Mr. Edwards I don't think it's a wise idea for presidential candidates to appoint the members of his cabinet prospectively or to suggest four people - indicate that one of them surely will be appointed. This is a decision that the president of the United States must make. The last candidate who indicated that he knew who his cabinet was going to be was Mr. Dewey in 1948. This is a race between the Vice President and myself for the presidency of the United States. There are a good many able men who could be secretary of state. I've made no judgment about who should be secretary of state. I think that judgment could be made after election if I'm successful. The people have to make a choice between Mr. Nixon and myself between the Republican party and the Democratic party between our approach to the problems which now disturb us as a nation and disturb us as a world power. The president bears the constitutional responsibility not the secretary of state for the conduct of foreign affairs. Some presidents have been strong in foreign policy; others have relied heavily on the secretary of state. I've been a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee; I run for the presidency with full knowledge that his great responsibility really given to him by the Constitution and by the force of events is in the field of foreign affairs. I'm asking the people's support as president. We will select the best man we can get. But I've not made a judgment and I have not narrowed down a list of three or four people among whom would be the candidate. MR. HOWE: Mr. Vice President do you have a comment? MR. NIXON: Well Mr. Edwards as you probably know I have consistently answered all questions with regard to who will be in the next cabinet by saying that that is the responsibility of the next president and it would be inappropriate to make any decisions on that or to announce any prior to the time that I had the right to do so. So that is my answer to this question. If you don't mind I'd like to use the balance of the time to respond to one of the comments that Senator Kennedy made on the previous question. Eh- He was talking about the Castro regime and what we had been eh- doing in Latin America. I would like to point out that when we look at our programs in Latin America we find that we have appropriated five times as much for Latin America as was appropriated by the previous Administration; we find that we have two billion dollars more for the Export-Import Bank; we have a new bank for Latin America alone of a billion dollars; we have the new program which was submitted at the Bogota Conference - this new program that President Eisenhower submitted approved by the last Congress - for five hundred million dollars. We have moved in Latin America very effectively and I'd also like to point this out: Senator Kennedy complains very appropriately about our inadequate ra- radio broadcasts for Latin America. Let me point out again that his Congress - the Democratic Congress - has cut eighty million dollars off of the Voice of America appropriations. Now he has to get a better job out of his Congress if he's going to get us the money that we need to conduct the foreign affairs of this country in Latin America or any place else. MR. HOWE: Walter Cronkite you have your first question for Vice President Nixon. MR. CRONKITE: Thank you Quincy. Mr. Vice President Senator Fulbright and now tonight Senator Kennedy maintain that the Administration is suppressing a report by the United States Information Agency that shows a decline in United States prestige overseas. Are you aware of such a report and if you are aware of the existence of such a report should not that report because of the great importance this issue has been given in this campaign be released to the public? MR. NIXON: Mr. Cronkite I naturally am aware of it because I of course pay attention to everything Senator Kennedy says as well as Senator Fulbright. Now in this connection I want to point out that the facts simply aren't as stated. First of all the report to which Senator Kennedy refers is one that was made many many months ago and related particularly to the uh - period immediately after Sputnik. Second as far as this report is concerned I would have no objection to having it made public. Third I would say this with regard to this report with regard to Gallup Polls of prestige abroad and everything else that we've been hearing about "what about American prestige abroad": America's prestige abroad will be just as high as the spokesmen for America allow it to be. Now when we have a presidential candidate for example - Senator Kennedy - stating over and over again that the United States is second in space and the fact of the matter is that the space score today is twenty-eight to eight - we've had twenty-eight successful shots they've had eight; when he states that we're second in education and I have seen Soviet education and I've seen ours and we're not; that we're second in science because they may be ahead in one area or another when overall we're way ahead of the Soviet Union and all other countries in science; when he says as he did in January of this year that we have the worst slums that we have the most crowded schools; when he says that seventeen million people go to bed hungry every night; when he makes statements like this what does this do to American prestige? Well it can only have the effect certainly of reducing it. Well let me make one thing clear. Senator Kennedy has a responsibility to criticize those things that are wrong but he has also a responsibility to be right in his criticism. Every one of these items that I have mentioned he's been wrong - dead wrong. And for that reason he has contributed to any lack of prestige. Finally let me say this: as far as prestige is concerned the first place it would show up would be in the United Nations. Now Senator Kennedy has referred to the vote on Communist China. Let's look at the vote on Hungary. There we got more votes for condemning Hungary and looking into that situation than we got the last year. Let's look at the reaction eh - reaction to Khrushchev and Eisenhower at the last U.N. session. Did Khrushchev gain because he took his shoe off and pounded the table and shouted and insulted? Not at all. The President gained. America gained by continuing the dignity the decency that has characterized us and it's that that keeps the prestige of America up not running down America the way Senator Kennedy has been running her down. MR. HOWE: Comment Senator Kennedy? MR. KENNEDY: I really don't need uh - Mr. Nixon to tell me about what my responsibilities are as a citizen. I've served this country for fourteen years in the Congress and before that in the service. I've just as high a devotion just as high an opinion. What I downgrade Mr. Nixon is the leadership the country is getting not the country. Now I didn't make most of the statements that you said I made. The s- I believe the Soviet Union is first in outer space. We have - may have made more shots but the size of their rocket thrust and all the rest - you yourself said to Khrushchev "You may be ahead of us in rocket thrust but we're ahead of you in color television" in your famous discussion in the kitchen. I think that color television is not as important as rocket thrust. Secondly I didn't say we had the worst slums in the world. I said we had too many slums. And that they are bad and we ought to do something about them and we ought to support housing legislation which this Administration has opposed. I didn't say we had the worst education in the world. What I said was that ten years ago we were producing twice as many scientists and engineers as the Soviet Union and today they're producing twice as many as we are and that this affects our security around the world. And fourth I believe that the polls and other studies and votes in the United Nations and anyone reading the paper and any citizen of the United States must come to the conclusion that the United States no longer carries the same image of a vital society on the move with its brightest days ahead as it carried a decade or two decades ago. Part of that is because we've stood still here at home because we haven't met our problems in the United States because we haven't had a moving economy. Part of that as the Gallup Polls show is because the Soviet Union made a breakthrough in outer space. Mr. George Allen head of your Information Service has said that that made the people of the world begin to wonder whether we were first in science. We're first in other areas of science but in space which is the new science we're not first. MR. HOWE: John Chancellor your first question for Senator Kennedy. MR. CHANCELLOR: Senator another question uh - in connection with our relations with the Russians. There have been stories from Washington from the Atomic Energy Commission hinting that the Russians may have resumed the testing of nuclear devices. Now if - sir if this is true should the United States resume nuclear testing and if the Russians do not start testing can you foresee any circumstances in 1961 in which the United States might resume its own series of tests? MR. KENNEDY: Yes I think the next president of the United States should make one last effort to secure an agreement on the cessation of tests number one. I think we should go back to Geneva who's ever elected president Mr. Nixon or myself and try once again. If we fail then if we're unable to come to an agreement - and I hope we can come to an agreement because it does not merely involve now the United States Britain France and the Soviet Union as atomic powers. Because new breakthroughs in atomic energy technology there's some indications that by the time the next president's term of office has come to an end there may be ten fifteen or twenty countries with an atomic capacity perhaps that many testing bombs with all the effect that it could have on the atmosphere and with all the chances that more and more countries will have an atomic capacity with more and more chance of war. So one more effort should be made. I don't think that even if that effort fails that it will be necessary to carry on tests in the atmosphere which pollute the at
