BILL SHADEL MODERATOR: Good evening. I'm Bill Shadel of ABC News. It's my privilege this evening to preside at this the third in the series of meetings on radio and television of the two major presidential candidates. Now like the last meeting the subjects to be discussed will be suggested by questions from a panel of correspondents. Unlike the first two programs however the two candidates will not be sharing the same platform. In New York the Democratic presidential nominee Senator John F. Kennedy; separated by three thousand miles in a Los Angeles studio the Republican presidential nominee Vice President Richard M. Nixon; now joined for tonight's discussion by a network of electronic facilities which permits each candidate to see and hear the other. Good evening Senator Kennedy. MR. KENNEDY: Good evening Mr. Shadel. MR. SHADEL: And good evening to you Vice President Nixon. MR. NIXON: Good evening Mr. Shadel. MR. SHADEL: And now to meet the panel of correspondents. Frank McGee NBC News; Charles Van Fremd CBS News; Douglass Cater Reporter magazine; Roscoe Drummond New York Herald Tribune. Now as you've probably noted the four reporters include a newspaper man and a magazine reporter; these two selected by lot by the press secretaries of the candidates from among the reporters traveling with the candidates. The broadcasting representatives were chosen by their companies. The rules for this evening have been agreed upon by the representatives of both candidates and the radio and television networks and I should like to read them. There will be no opening statements by the candidates nor any closing summation. The entire hour will be devoted to answering questions from the reporters. Each candidate to be questioned in turn with opportunity for comment by the other. Each answer will be limited to two and one-half minutes each comment to one and a half minutes. The reporters are free to ask any question they choose on any subject. Neither candidate knows what questions will be asked. Time alone will dete- determine who will be asked the final question. Now the first question is from Mr. McGee and is for Senator Kennedy. MR. McGEE: Senator Kennedy yesterday you used the words "trigger-happy" in referring to Vice President Richard Nixon's stand on defending the islands of Quemoy and Matsu. Last week on a program like this one you said the next president would come face to face with a serious crisis in Berlin. So the question is: would you take military action to defend Berlin? MR. KENNEDY: Mr. McGee we have a contractual right to be in Berlin coming out of the conversations at Potsdam and of World War II. That has been reinforced by direct commitments of the president of the United States; it's been reinforced by a number of other nations under NATO. I've stated on many occasions that the United States must meet its commitment on Berlin. It is a commitment that we have to meet if we're going to protect the security of Western Europe. And therefore on this question I don't think that there is any doubt in the mind of any American; I hope there is not any doubt in the mind of any member of the community of West Berlin; I'm sure there isn't any doubt in the mind of the Russians. We will meet our commitments to maintain the freedom and independence of West Berlin. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Vice President do you wish to comment? MR. NIXON: Yes. As a matter of fact the statement that Senator Kennedy made was that - to the effect that there were trigger-happy Republicans that my stand on Quemoy and Matsu was an indication of trigger-happy Republicans. I resent that comment. I resent it because th- it's an implication that Republicans have been trigger-happy and therefore would lead this nation into war. I would remind Senator Kennedy of the past fifty years. I would ask him to name one Republican president who led this nation into war. There were three Democratic presidents who led us into war. I do not mean by that that one party is a war party and the other party is a peace party. But I do say that any statement to the effect that the Republican party is trigger-happy is belied by the record. We had a war when we came into power in 1953. We got rid of that; we've kept out of other wars; and certainly that doesn't indicate that we're trigger-happy. We've been strong but we haven't been trigger-happy. As far as Berlin is concerned there isn't any question about the necessity of defending Berlin; the rights of people there to be free; and there isn't any question about what the united American people - Republicans and Democrats alike - would do in the event there were an attempt by the Communists to take over Berlin. MR. SHADEL: The next question is by Mr. Von Fremd for Vice President Nixon. MR. VON FREMD: Mr. Vice President a two-part question concerning the offshore islands in the Formosa Straits. If you were president and the Chinese Communists tomorrow began an invasion of Quemoy and Matsu would you launch the uh - United States into a war by sending the Seventh Fleet and other military forces to resist this aggression; and secondly if the uh - regular conventional forces failed to halt such uh - such an invasion would you authorize the use of nuclear weapons? MR. NIXON: Mr. Von Fremd it would be completely irresponsible for a candidate for the presidency or for a president himself to indicate the course of action and the weapons he would use in the event of such an attack. I will say this: in the event that such an attack occurred and in the event the attack was a prelude to an attack on Formosa - which would be the indication today because the Chinese Communists say over and over again that their objective is not the offshore islands that they consider them only steppingstones to taking Formosa - in the event that their attack then were a prelude to an attack on Formosa there isn't any question but that the United States would then again as in the case of Berlin honor our treaty obligations and stand by our ally of Formosa. But to indicate in advance how we would respond to indicate the nature of this response would be incorrect; it would certainly be inappropriate; it would not be in the best interests of the United States. I will only say this however in addition: to do what Senator Kennedy has suggested - to suggest that we will surrender these islands or force our Chinese Nationalist allies to surrender them in advance - is not something that would lead to peace; it is something that would lead in my opinion to war. This is the history of dealing with dictators. This is something that Senator Kennedy and all Americans must know. We tried this with Hitler. It didn't work. He wanted first uh - we know Austria and then he went on to the Sudetenland and then Danzig and each time it was thought this is all that he wanted. Now what do the Chinese Communists want? They don't want just Quemoy and Matsu; they don't want just Formosa; they want the world. And the question is if you surrender or indicate in advance that you're not going to defend any part of the free world and you figure that's going to satisfy them it doesn't satisfy them. It only whets their appetite; and then the question comes when do you stop them? I've often heard President Eisenhower in discussing this question make the statement that if we once start the process of indicating that this point or that point is not the place to stop those who threaten the peace and freedom of the world where do we stop them? And I say that those of us who stand against surrender of territory - this or any others - in the face of blackmail in the s- face of force by the Communists are standing for the course that will lead to peace. MR. SHADEL: Senator Kennedy do you wish to comment? MR. KENNEDY: Yes. The whole th- the United States now has a treaty - which I voted for in the United States Senate in 1955 - to defend Formosa and the Pescadores Island. The islands which Mr. Nixon is discussing are five or four miles respectively off the coast of China. Now when Senator Green the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee wrote to the President he received back on the second of October 1958 - "neither you nor any other American need feel the U.S. will be involved in military hostilities merely in the defense of Quemoy and Matsu." Now that is the issue. I believe we must meet our commitment to uh - Formosa. I support it and the Pescadores Island. That is the present American position. The treaty does not include these two islands. Mr. Nixon suggests uh - that the United States should go to war if these two islands are attacked. I suggest that if Formosa is attacked or the Pescadores or if there's any military action in any area which indicates an attack on Formosa and the Pescadores then of course the United States is at war to defend its treaty. Now I must say what Mr. Nixon wants to do is commit us - as I understand him so that we can be clear if there's a disagreement - he wants us to be committed to the defense of these islands merely as the defense of these islands as free territory not as part of the defense of Formosa. Admiral Yarnell the commander of the Asiatic fleet has said that these islands are not worth the bones of a single American. The President of the United States has indicated they are not within the treaty area. They were not within the treaty area when the treaty was passed in fifty-five. We have attempted to persuade Chiang Kai-shek as late as January of 1959 to reduce the number of troops he has on them. This is a serious issue and I think we ought to understand completely if we disagree and if so where. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Cater has the next question for Senator Kennedy. MR. CATER: Senator Kennedy last week you said that before we should hold another summit conference that it was important that the United States build its strength. Modern weapons take quite a long time to build. What sort of prolonged period do you envisage before there can be a summit conference? And do you think that there can be any new initiatives on the grounds of nuclear disarmament uh - nuclear control or weapons control d- uh - during this period? MR. KENNEDY: Well I think we should st- strengthen our conventional forces and we should attempt in January February and March of next year to increase the airlift capacity of our conventional forces. Then I believe that we should move full time on our missile production particularly on Minuteman and on Polaris. It may be a long period but we must - we must get started immediately. Now on the question of disarmament particularly nuclear disarmament I must say that I feel that another effort should be made by a new Administration in January of 1961 to renew negotiations with the Soviet Union and see whether it's possible to come to some conclusion which will lessen the chances of contamination of the atmosphere and also lessen the chances that other powers will begin to possess a nuclear capacity. There are indications because of new inventions that ten fifteen or twenty nations will have a nuclear capacity - including Red China - by the end of the presidential office in 1964. This is extremely serious. There have been many wars in the history of mankind. And to take a chance uh - now be - and not make every effort that we could make to provide for some control over these weapons I think would be a great mistake. One of my disagreements with the present Administration has been that I don't feel a real effort has been made an this very sensitive subject not only of nuclear controls but also of general disarmament. Less than a hundred people have been working throughout the entire federal government on this subject and I believe it's been reflected in our success and failures at Geneva. Now we may not succeed. The Soviet Union may not agree to an inspection system. We may be able to get satisfactory assurances. It may be necessary for us to begin testing again. But I hope the next Administration - and if I have anything to do with it the next Administration will - make one last great effort to provide for control of nuclear testing control of nuclear weapons if possible control of outer space free from weapons and also to begin again the subject of general disarmament levels. These must be done. If we cannot succeed then we must strengthen ourselves. But I would make the effort because I think the fate not only of our own civilization but I think the fate of world and the future of the human race is involved in preventing a nuclear war. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Vice President your comment? MR. NIXON: Yes. I am going to make a major speech on this whole subject next week before the next debate and I will have an opportunity then to answer any other questions that may arise with regard to my position on it. There isn't any question but that we must move forward in every possible way to reduce the danger of war; to move toward controlled disarmament; to control tests; but also let's have in mind this: when Senator Kennedy suggests that we haven't been making an effort he simply doesn't know what he's talking about. It isn't a question of the number of people who are working in an Administration. It's a question of who they are. This has been one of the highest level operations in the whole State Department right under the President himself. We have gone certainly the extra mile and then some in making offers to the Soviet Union on control of tests on disarmament and in every other way. And I just want to make one thing very clear. Yes we should make a great effort. But under no circumstances must the United States ever make an agreement based on trust. There must be an absolute guarantee. Now just a comment on Senator Kennedy's last answer. He forgets that in this same debate on the Formosa resolution which he said he voted for - which he did - that he voted against an amendment or was recorded against an amendment - and on this particular - or for an amendment I should say - which passed the Senate overwhelmingly seventy to twelve. And that amendment put the Senate of the United States on record with a majority of the Senator's own party voting for it as well as the majority of Republicans - put them on record - against the very position that the Senator takes now of surrendering of indicating in advance that the United States will not defend the offshore islands. MR. SHADEL: The next question is by Mr. Drummond for Vice President Nixon. MR. DRUMMOND: Mr. Nixon I would like to ask eh - one more aspect or raise another aspect of this same question. Uh - it is my understanding that President Eisenhower never advocated that Quemoy and Matsu should be defended under all circumstances as a matter of principle. I heard Secretary Dulles at a press conference in fifty-eight say that he thought that it was a mistake for Chiang Kai-shek to deploy troops to these islands. I would like to ask what has led you to take what appears to be a different position on this subject. MR. NIXON: Well Mr. Drummond first of all referring to Secretary Dulles' press conference I think if you read it all - and I know that you have - you will find that Secretary Dulles also indicated in that press conference that when the troops were withdrawn from Quemoy that the implication was certainly of everything that he said that Quemoy could better be defended. There were too many infantrymen there not enough heavy artillery; and certainly I don't think there was any implication in Secretary Dulles' statement that Quemoy and Matsu should not be defended in the event that they were attacked and that attack was a preliminary to an attack on Formosa. Now as far as President Eisenhower is concerned I have often heard him discuss this question. As I uh - related a moment ago the President has always indicated that we must not make the mistake in dealing with the dictator of indicating that we are going to make a concession at the point of a gun. Whenever you do that inevitably the dictator is encouraged to try it again. So first it will be Quemoy and Matsu next it may be Formosa. What do we do then? My point is this: that once you do this - follow this course of action - of indicating that you are not going to defend a particular area the inevitable result is that it encourages a man who is determined to conquer the world to press you to the point of no return. And that means war. We went through this tragic experience leading to World War II. We learned our lesson again in Korea We must not learn it again. That is why I think the Senate was right including a majority of the Democrats a majority of the Republicans when they rejected Senator Kennedy's position in 1955. And incidentally Senator Johnson was among those who rejected that position - voted with the seventy against the twelve. The Senate was right because they knew the lesson of history. And may I say too that I would trust that Senator Kennedy would change his position on this - change it; because as long as he as a major presidential candidate continues to suggest that we are going to turn over these islands he is only encouraging the aggressors - the Chinese Communist and the Soviet aggressors - to press the United States to press us to the point where war would be inevitable. The road to war is always paved with good intentions. And in this instance the good intentions of course are a desire for peace. But certainly we're not going to have peace by giving in and indicating in advance that we are not going to defend what has become a symbol of freedom. MR. SHADEL: Senator Kennedy. MR. KENNEDY: I don't think it's possible for Mr. Nixon to state the record in distortion of the facts with more precision than he just did. In 1955 Mr. Dulles at a press conference said: "The treaty that we have with the Republic of China excludes Quemoy and Matsu from the treaty area." That was done with much thought and deliberation. Therefore that treaty does not commit the United States to defend anything except Formosa and the Pescadores and to deal with acts against that treaty area. I completely sustained the treaty. I voted for it. I would take any action necessary to defend the treaty Formosa and the Pescadores Island. What we're now talking about is the Vice President's determination to guarantee Quemoy and Matsu which are four and five miles off the coast of Red China which are not within the treaty area. I do not suggest that Chiang Kai-shek - and this Administration has been attempting since 1955 to persuade Chiang Kai-shek to lessen his troop commitments. Uh - He sent a mission - the President - in 1955 of Mr. uh - Robertson and Admiral Radford. General Twining said they were still doing it in 1959. General Ridgway said - who was Chief of Staff: "To go to war for Quemoy and Matsu to me would seem an unwarranted and tragic course to take. To me that concept is completely repugnant." So I stand with them. I stand with the Secretary of State Mr. Herter who said these islands were indefensible. I believe that we should meet our commitments and if the Chinese Communists attack the Pescadores and Formosa they know that it will mean a war. I would not ho- hand over these islands under any point of gun. But I merely say that the treaty is quite precise and I sustain the treaty. Mr. Nixon would add a guarantee to islands five miles off the coast of the re- Republic of China when he's never really protested the Communists seizing Cuba ninety miles off the coast of the United States. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Von Fremd has a question for Senator Kennedy. MR. VON FREMD: Senator Kennedy I'd like to uh - shift the conversation if I may to a domestic uh - political argument. The chairman of the Republican National Committee Senator Thruston Morton declared earlier this week that you owed Vice President Nixon and the Republican party a public apology for some strong charges made by former President Harry Truman who bluntly suggested where the Vice President and the Republican party could go. Do you feel that you owe the Vice President an apology? MR. KENNEDY: Well I must say that uh - Mr. Truman has uh - his methods of expressing things; he's been in politics for fifty years; he's been president of the United States. They may - are not my style. But I really don't think there's anything that I could say to President Truman that's going to cause him at the age of seventy-six to change his particular speaking manner. Perhaps Mrs. Truman can but I don't think I can. I'll just have to tell Mr. Morton that. If you'd pass that message on to him. MR. SHADEL: Any comment Mr. Vice President? MR. NIXON: Yes I think so. Of course both er - Senator Kennedy and I have felt Mr. Truman's ire; and uh - consequently I think he can speak with some feeling on this subject. I just do want to say one thing however. We all have tempers; I have one; I'm sure Senator Kennedy has one. But when a man's president of the United States or a former president he has an obligation not to lose his temper in public. One thing I've noted as I've traveled around the country are the tremendous number of children who come out to see the presidential candidates. I see mothers holding their babies up so that they can see a man who might be president of the United States. I know Senator Kennedy sees them too. It makes you realize that whoever is president is going to be a man that all the children of America will either look up to or will look down to. And I can only say that I'm very proud that President Eisenhower restored dignity and decency and frankly good language to the conduct of the presidency of the United States. And I only hope that should I win this election that I could approach President Eisenhower in maintaining the dignity of the office; in seeing to it that whenever any mother or father talks to his child he can look at the man in the White House and whatever he may think of his policies he will say: "Well there is a man who maintains the kind of standards personally that I would want my child to follow." MR. SHADEL: Mr. Cater's question is for Vice President Nixon. MR. CATER: Mr. Vice President I'd like to return just once more if I may to this area of dealing with the Communists. Critics have claimed that on at least three occasions in recent years - on the sending of American troops to Indochina in 1954 on the matter of continuing the U-2 flights uh - in May and then on this definition of the - of our commitment to the offshore island - that you have overstated the Administration position that you have taken a more bellicose position than President Eisenhower. Just two days ago you said that you called on uh - Senator Kennedy to serve notice to Communist aggressors around the world that we're not going to retreat one inch more any place where as we did retreat from the Tachen Islands or at least Chiang Kai-shek did. Would you say this was a valid criticism of your statement of foreign policy? MR. NIXON: Well Mr. Cater of course it's a criticism that uh - is being made. Uh - I obviously don't think it's valid. I have supported the Administration's position and I think that that position has been correct; I think my position has been correct. As far as Indochina was concerned I stated over and over again that it was essential during that period that the United States make it clear that we would not tolerate Indochina falling under Communist domination. Now as a result of our taking the strong stand that we did the civil war there was ended; and today at least in the south of Indochina the Communists have moved out and we do have a strong free bastion there. Now looking to the U-2 flights I would like to point out that I have been supporting the President's position throughout. I think the President was correct in ordering these flights. I think the President was correct certainly in his decision to continue the flights while the conference was going on. I noted for example in reading a - uh - a - a particular discussion that Senator Kennedy had with Dave Garroway shortly after the uh - his statement about regrets that uh - he made the statement that he felt that these particular flights uh - were ones that shouldn't have occurred right at that time and the indication was how would Mr. Khrushchev had felt if we had uh - had a flight over the uni- how would we have felt if Mr. Khrushchev ha - uh - had a flight over the United States while uh - he was visiting here. And the answer of course is that Communist espionage goes on all the time. The answer is that the United States can't afford to have a es- an es - a espionage lack or should we s- uh - lag - or should I say uh - an intelligence lag - any more than we can afford to have a missile lag. Now referring to your question with regard to Quemoy and Matsu. What I object to here is the constant reference to surrendering these islands. Senator Kennedy quotes the record which he read from a moment ago but what he forgets to point out is that the key vote - a uh - vote which I've referred to several times - where he was in the minority was one which rejected his position. Now why did they reject it? For the very reason that those Senators knew as the President of the United States knew that you should not indicate to the Communists in advance that you're going to surrender an area that's free. Why? Because they know as Senator Kennedy will have to know that if you do that you encourage them to more aggression. MR. SHADEL: Senator Kennedy? MR. KENNEDY: Well number one on Indochina Mr. Nixon talked in - before the newspaper editors in the spring of 1954 about putting and I quote him "American boys into Indochina." The reason Indochina was preserved was the result of the Geneva Conference which Indochina. Number two on the question of the U-2 flights. I thought the. U-2 flight in May just before the conference was a mistake in timing because of the hazards involved if the summit conference had any hope for success. I never criticized the U-2 flights in general however. I never suggested espionage should stop. It still goes on I would assume on both sides. Number three the Vice President - on May fifteenth after the U-2 flight - indicated that the flights were going on even though the Administration and the President had canceled the flights on May twelfth. Number three the pre - Vice President suggests that we should keep the Communists in doubt about whether we would fight on Quemoy and Matsu. That's not the position he's taking. He's indicating that we should fight for these islands come what may because they are in his words in the area of freedom. He didn't take that position on Tibet. He didn't take that position on Budapest. He doesn't take that position that I've seen so far in Laos. Guinea and Ghana have both moved within the Soviet sphere of influence in foreign policy; so has Cuba. I merely say that the United States should meet its commitments to Que- to uh - Formosa and the Pescadores. But as Admiral Yarnell has said and he's been supported by most military authority these islands that we're now talking about are not worth the bones of a single American soldier; and I know how difficult it is to sustain troops close to the shore under artillery bombardment. And therefore I think we should make it very clear the disagreement between Mr. Nixon and myself. He's extending the Administration's commitment. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Drummond's question is for Senator Kennedy. MR. DRUMMOND: Uh - Mr. Kennedy Representative Adam Clayton Powell in the course of his speaking tour in your behalf is saying and I quote: "The Ku Klux Klan is riding again in this campaign. If it doesn't stop all bigots will vote for Nixon and all right-thinking Christians and Jews will vote for Kennedy rather than be found in the ranks of the Klan-minded." End quotation. Governor Michael DiSalle is saying much the same thing. What I would like to ask Senator Kennedy is what is the purpose of this sort of thing and how do you feel about it? MR. KENNEDY: Well the que- the - Mr. Griffin I believe who is the head of the Klan who lives in Tampa Florida indicated a - in a statement I think two or three weeks ago that he was not going to vote for me and that he was going to vote for Mr. Nixon. I do not suggest in any way nor have I ever that that indicates that Mr. Nixon has the slightest sympathy involvement or in any way imply any inferences in regard to the Ku Klux Klan. That's absurd. I don't suggest that I don't support it. I would disagree with it. Mr. Nixon knows very well that in this - in this whole matter that's been involved with the so-called religious discussion in this campaign I've never suggested even by the vaguest implication that he did anything but disapprove it. And that's my view now. I disapprove of the issue. I do not suggest that Mr. Nixon does in any way. MR. SHADEL: Mr. Vice President. MR. NIXON: Well I welcome this opportunity to join Senator Kennedy completely on that statement and to say before this largest television audience in history something that I have been saying in the past and want to - will always say in the future. On our last television debate I pointed out that it was my position that Americans must choose the best man that either party could produce. We can't settle for anything but the best. And that means of course the best man that this nation can produce. And that means that we can't have any test of religion. We can't have any test of race. It must be a test of a man. Also as far as religion is concerned. I have seen Communism abroad. I see what it does. Communism is the enemy of all religions; and we who do believe in God must join together. We must not be divided on this issue. The worst thing that I can think can happen in this campaign would be for it to be decided on religious issues. I obviously repudiate the Klan; I repudiate anybody who uses the religious issue; I will not tolerate it I have ordered all of my people to have nothing to do with it and I say - say to this great audience whoever may be listening remember if you believe in America if you want America to set the right example to the world that we cannot have religious or racial prejudice. We cannot have it in our hearts. But we certainly cannot have it in a presidential campaign. MR. SHADEL: Mr. McGee has a question for Vice President Nixon. MR. McGEE: Mr. Vice President some of your early campaign literature said you were making a study to see if new laws were needed to protect the public against excessive use of power by labor unions. Have you decided whether such new laws are needed and if so what would they do? MR. NIXON: Mr. McGee I am planning a speech on that subject next week. Uh - Also so that we can get the uh - opportunity for the questioners to question me it will be before the next television debate. Uh - I will say simply in advance of it that I believe that in this area the laws which should be passed uh - as far as the big national emergency strikes are concerned are ones that will give the president more weapons with which to deal with those strikes. Now I have a basic disagreement with Senator Kennedy though on this point. He has taken the position when he first indicated in October of last year that he would even favor compulsory arbitration as one of the weapons the president might have to stop a national emergency strike. I understand in his last speech before the Steelworkers Union that he changed that position and indicated that he felt that government seizure might be the best way to stop a strike which could not be settled by collective bargaining. I do not believe we should have either compulsory arbitration or seizure. I think the moment that you give to the union on the one side and to management on the other side the escape hatch of eventually going to government to get it settled that most of these great strikes will end up being settled by government and that will be a - be in the end in my opinion wage control; it would mean price control - all the things that we do not want. I do believe however that we can give to the president of the United States powers in addition to what he presently has in the fact finding area which would enable him to be more effective than we have been in handling these strikes. One last point I should make. The record in handling them has been very good during this Administration. We have had less man-hours lost by strikes in these last seven years than we had in the previous seven years by a great deal. And I only want to say that however good the record is it's got to be better. Because in this critical year - period of the sixties we've got to move forward all Americans must move forward together and we have to get th
