I am Edwin Newman moderator of this first debate of the 1976 campaign between Gerald R. Ford of Michigan Republican candidate for President and Jimmy Carter of Georgia Democratic candidate for President. We thank you President Ford and we thank you Governor Carter for being with us tonight. There are to be three debates between the Presidential candidates and one between the Vice-Presidential candidates. All are being arranged by the League of Women Voters Education Fund. Tonight's debate the first between presidential candidates in 16 years and the first ever in which an incumbent President has participated is taking place before an audience in the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia just 3 blocks from Independence Hall. The television audience may reach 100 million in the United States and many millions overseas. Tonight's debate focuses on domestic and economic policy. Questions will be put by Frank Reynolds of ABC News James Gannon of the Wall Street Journal and Elizabeth Drew of the New Yorker magazine. Under the agreed rules the first question will go to Governor Carter. That was decided by the toss of a coin. He will have up to 3 minutes to answer. One follow-up question will be permitted with up to 2 minutes to reply. President Ford will then have 2 minutes to respond. The next question will go to President Ford with the same time arrangements and questions will continue to be alternated between the candidates. Each man will make a 3-minute statement at the end Governor Carter to go first. President Ford and Governor Carter do not have any notes or prepared remarks with them this evening. Mr. Reynolds your question for Governor Carter. MR. REYNOLDS. Mr. President Governor Carter. Governor in an interview with the Associated Press last week you said you believed these debates would alleviate a lot of concern that some voters have about you. Well one of those concerns-not an uncommon one about candidates in any year-is that many voters say they don't really know where you stand. Now you have made jobs your number one priority and you have said you are committed to a drastic reduction in unemployment. Can you say now Governor in specific terms what your first step would be next January if you are elected to achieve that? MR. CARTER. Yes. First of all it's to recognize the tremendous economic strength of this country and to set the putting back to work of our people as a top priority. This is an effort that ought to be done primarily by strong leadership in the White House the inspiration of our people the tapping of business agriculture industry labor and government at all levels to work on this project. We will never have an end to the inflationary spiral and we will never have a balanced budget until we get our people back to work. There are several things that can be done specifically that are not now being done: first of all to channel research and development funds into areas that will provide large numbers of jobs; secondly we need to have a commitment in the private sector to cooperate with government in matters like housing. Here a very small investment of taxpayers' money in the housing field can bring large numbers of extra jobs in the guarantee of mortgage loans in the putting forward of 202 programs for housing for older people and so forth to cut down the roughly 20-percent unemployment that now exists in the construction industry. Another thing is to deal with our needs in the central cities where the unemployment rate is extremely high-sometimes among minority groups those who don't speak English or who are black or young people-a 40-percent unemployment. Here a CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps]-type program would be appropriate to channel money into the sharing with private sector and also local and State governments to employ young people who are now out of work. Another very important aspect of our economy would be to increase production in every way possible to hold down taxes on individuals and to shift the tax burdens on to those who have avoided paying taxes in the past. These kinds of specific things none of which are being done now would be a great help in reducing unemployment. There is an additional factor that needs to be done and covered very succinctly and that is to make sure that we have a good relationship between management business on the one hand and labor on the other. In a lot of places where unemployment is very high we might channel specific targeted job opportunities by paying part of the salary of unemployed people and also sharing with local governments the payment of salaries which would let us cut down the unemployment rate much lower before we hit the inflationary level. But I believe that by the end of the first 4 years of the next term we could have the unemployment rate down to 3 percent-adult unemployment-which is about 4 to 4?? percent overall a controlled inflation rate and have a balanced growth of about 4 to 6 percent around 5 percent which would give us a balanced budget. MR. REYNOLDS. Governor in the event you are successful and you do achieve a drastic drop in unemployment that is likely to create additional pressure on prices. How willing are you to consider an incomes policy; in other words wage and price controls? MR. CARTER. Well we now have such a low utilization of our productive capacity about 73 percent-I think it's about the lowest since the Great Depression years-and such a high unemployment rate now-7.9 percent-that we have a long way to go in getting people to work before we have the inflationary pressures. And I think this would be easy to accomplish to get jobs now without having the strong inflationary pressures that would be necessary. I would not favor the payment of a given fixed income to people unless they are not able to work. But with tax incentives for the low-income groups we could build up their income levels above the poverty level and not make welfare more profitable than work. THE MODERATOR. Mr. President your response? THE PRESIDENT. I don't believe that Mr. Carter has been any more specific in this case than he has been on many other instances. I notice particularly that he didn't endorse the Humphrey-Hawkins bill which he has on occasions and which is included as a part of the Democratic platform. That legislation allegedly would help our unemployment but we all know that it would have controlled our economy. It would have added $10 to $30 billion each year in additional expenditures by the Federal Government. It would have called for export controls on agricultural products. In my judgment the best way to get jobs is to expand the private sector where five out of six jobs today exist in our economy. We can do that by reducing Federal taxes as I proposed about a year ago when I called for a tax reduction of $28 billion three-quarters of it to go to private taxpayers and one-quarter to the business sector. We could add to jobs in the major metropolitan areas by a proposal that I recommended that would give tax incentives to business to move into the inner city and to expand or to build new plants so that they would take a plant or expand a plant where people are and people are currently unemployed. We could also help our youth with some of the proposals that would give to young people an opportunity to work and learn at the same time just like we give money to young people who are going to college. Those are the kind of specifics that I think we have to discuss on these debates and these are the kind of programs that I will talk about on my time. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Gannon your question to President Ford. MR. GANNON. Mr. President I would like to continue for a moment on this question of taxes which you have just raised. You have said that you favor more tax cuts for middle-income Americans even those earning up to $30000 a year. That presumably would cost the Treasury quite a bit of money in lost revenue. In view of the very large budget deficits that you have accumulated and that are still in prospect how is it possible to promise further tax cuts and to reach your goal of balancing the budget? THE PRESIDENT. At the time Mr. Gannon that I made the recommendation for a $28 billion tax cut-three-quarters of it to go to individual taxpayers and 25 percent to American business-I said at the same time that we had to hold the lid on Federal spending; that for every dollar of a tax reduction we had to have an equal reduction in Federal expenditures-a one-for-one proposition. And I recommended that to the Congress with a budget ceiling of $395 billion and that would have permitted us to have a $28 billion tax reduction. In my tax reduction program for middle-income taxpayers I recommended that the Congress increase personal exemptions from $750 per person to $1000 per person. That would mean of course that for a family of four that that family would have $1000 more personal exemption money that they could spend for their own purposes money that the Government wouldn't have to spend. But if we keep the lid on Federal spending which I think we can with the help of the Congress we can justify fully a $28 billion tax reduction. In the budget that I submitted to the Congress in January of this year I recommended a 50-percent cutback in the rate of growth of Federal spending. For the last 10 years the budget of the United States has grown from about 11 percent per year. We can't afford that kind of growth in Federal spending. And in the budget that I recommended we cut it in half-a growth rate of 5 to 5 1/2 percent. With that kind of limitation on Federal spending we can fully justify the tax reductions that I have proposed. And it seems to me with the stimulant of more money in the hands of the taxpayer and with more money in the hands of business to expand to modernize to provide more jobs our economy will be stimulated so that we will get more revenue and we will have a more prosperous economy. MR. GANNON. Mr. President to follow up a moment the Congress has passed a tax bill which is before you now which did not meet exactly the sort of outline that you requested. What is your intention on that bill since it doesn't meet your requirements? Do you plan to sign that bill? THE PRESIDENT. That tax bill does not entirely meet the criteria that I established. I think the Congress should have added another $10 billion reduction in personal income taxes including the increase of personal exemptions from $750 to $1000. And Congress could have done that if the budget committees of the Congress and the Congress as a whole had not increased the spending that I recommended in the budget. I am sure you know that in the resolutions passed by the Congress they have added about $17 billion in more spending by the Congress over the budget that I recommended. So I would prefer in that tax bill to have an additional tax cut and a further limitation on Federal spending. Now this tax bill that hasn't reached the White House yet-but is expected in a day or two-it's about 1500 pages. It has some good provisions in it; it has left out some that I have recommended unfortunately. On the other hand when you have a bill of that magnitude with those many provisions a President has to sit and decide if there is more good than bad. And from the analysis that I have made so far it seems to me that that tax bill does justify my signature and my approval. THE MODERATOR. Governor Carter your response. MR. CARTER. Well Mr. Ford is changing considerably his previous philosophy. The present tax structure is a disgrace to this country. It's just a welfare program for the rich. As a matter of fact 25 percent of the total tax deductions go for only 1 percent of the richest people in this country and over 50 percent of the tax credits go for the 14 percent of the richest people in this country. When Mr. Ford first became President in August of 1974 the first thing he did in October was to ask for a $4.7 billion increase in taxes on our people in the midst of the heaviest recession since the Great Depression of the 1940's. In January of 1975 he asked for a tax change a $5.6 billion increase on low and middle-income private individuals a $6 1/2 billion decrease on the corporations and the special interests. In December of 1975 he vetoed the roughly $18 to $20 billion tax reduction bill that had been passed by the Congress. And then he came back later on in January of this year and he did advocate a $10 billion tax reduction but it would be offset by a $6 billion increase this coming January in deductions for social security payments and for unemployment compensation. The whole philosophy of the Republican Party including my opponent has been to pile on taxes on low-income people to take them off on the corporations. As a matter of fact since the late sixties when Mr. Nixon took office we've had a reduction in the percentage of taxes paid by corporations from 30 percent down to about 20 percent. We've had an increase in taxes paid by individuals payroll taxes from 14 percent up to 20 percent. This is what the Republicans have done to us. This is why tax reform is so important. THE MODERATOR. Mrs. Drew your question to Governor Carter. MS. DREW. Governor Carter you've proposed a number of new or enlarged programs including jobs and health welfare reform child care aid to education aid to cities changes in social security and housing subsidies. You've also said that you want to balance the budget by the end of your first term. Now you haven't put a price tag on those programs but even if we priced them conservatively and we count for full employment by the end of your first term and we count for the economic growth that would occur during that period there still isn't enough money to pay for those programs and balance the budget by any estimates that I've been able to see. So in that case what would give? MR. CARTER. Well as a matter of fact there is. If we assume a rate of growth of our economy equivalent to what it was during President Johnson and President Kennedy even before the Vietnamese war and if we assume that at the end of the 4-year period we can cut our unemployment rate down to 4 to 4?? percent. Under those circumstances even assuming no elimination of unnecessary programs and assuming an increase in the allotment of money to finance programs increasing as the inflation rate does my economic projects I think confirmed by the House and the Senate committees have been with a $60 billion extra amount of money that can be spent in fiscal year '81-which would be the last year of this next term-within that $60 billion increase there would be fit the programs that I promised the American people. I might say too that if we see that these goals cannot be reached-and I believe they are reasonable goals-then I would cut back on the rate of implementation of new programs in order to accommodate a balanced budget by fiscal year '81 which is the last year of the next term. I believe that we ought to have a balanced budget during normal economic circumstances. And these projections have been very carefully made. I stand behind them. And if they should be in error slightly on the down side then I will phase in the programs that we've advocated more slowly. Ms. DREW. Governor according to the budget committees of the Congress that you referred to if we get to full employment what they project at a 4-percent unemployment and as you say even allowing for the inflation in the programs there would not be anything more than a surplus of $5 billion by 1981. Conservative estimates of your programs would be that they'd be about $85 to $100 billion. So how do you say that you are going to be able to do these things and balance the budget? MR. CARTER. Well the assumption that you have described that's different is in the rate of growth of our economy. MS. DREW. No they took that into account in those figures. MR. CARTER. I believe that it's accurate to say that the committees to whom you refer with the employment rate that you state and with the 5 to 5 1/2 percent growth rate in our economy that the projections would be a $60 billion increase in the amount of money that we have to spend in 1981 compared to now. And in that framework would be fit any improvements in the programs. Now this does not include any extra control over unnecessary spending the weeding out of obsolete or obsolescent programs. We will have a safety version built in with complete reorganization of the executive branch of Government which I am pledged to do. The present bureaucratic structure of the Federal Government is a mess. And if I am elected President that's going to be a top priority of mine-to completely revise the structure of the Federal Government to make it economical efficient purposeful and manageable for a change. And also I am going to institute zero-base budgeting which I used 4 years in Georgia which assesses every program every year and eliminates those programs that are obsolete or obsolescent. But with these projections we will have a balanced budget by fiscal year 1981 if I am elected President keep my promises to the American people. And it's just predicated on very modest but I think accurate projections of employment increases and a growth in our national economy equal to what was experienced under Kennedy Johnson before the Vietnam war. THE MODERATOR. President Ford. THE PRESIDENT. If it is true that there will be a $60 billion surplus by fiscal year 1981 rather than spend that money for all the new programs that Governor Carter recommends and endorses and which are included in the Democratic platform I think the American taxpayer ought to get an additional tax break a tax reduction of that magnitude. I feel that the taxpayers are the ones that need the relief. I don't think we should add additional programs of the magnitude that Governor Carter talks about. It seems to me that our tax structure today has rates that are too high. But I am very glad to point out has since 1969 during a Republican administration we have had 10 million people taken off of the tax rolls at the lower end of the taxpayer area. And at the same time assuming that I sign the tax bill that was mentioned by Mr. Gannon we will in the last two tax bills have increased the minimum tax on all wealthy taxpayers. And I believe that by eliminating 10 million taxpayers in the last 8 years and by putting a heavier tax burden on those in the higher tax brackets plus the other actions that have been taken we can give taxpayers adequate tax relief. Now it seems to me that as we look at the recommendations of the budget committees and our own projections there isn't going to be any $60 billion dividend. I've heard of those dividends in the past. It always happens. We expected one at the time of the Vietnam war but it was used up before we ever ended the war and taxpayers never got the adequate relief they deserved. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Reynolds. MR. REYNOLDS. Mr. President when you came into office you spoke very eloquently of the need for a time for healing. And very early in your administration you went out to Chicago and you announced you proposed a program of case-by-case pardons for draft resisters to restore them to full citizenship. Some 14000 young men took advantage of your offer but another 90000 did not. In granting the pardon to former President Nixon sir part of your rationale was to put Watergate behind us to if I may quote you again truly end "our long national nightmare." Why does not the same rationale apply now today in our Bicentennial Year to the young men who resisted in Vietnam and many of them still in exile abroad? THE PRESIDENT. The amnesty program that I recommended in Chicago in September of 1974 would give to all draft evaders and military deserters the opportunity to earn their good record back. About 14 to 15000 did take advantage of that program. We gave them ample time. I am against an across-the-board pardon of draft evaders or military deserters. Now in the case of Mr. Nixon the reason the pardon was given was that when I took office this country was in a very very divided condition. There was hatred: there was divisiveness; people had lost faith in their government in many many respects. Mr. Nixon resigned and I became President. It seemed to me that if I was to adequately and effectively handle the problems of high inflation a growing recession the involvement of the United States still in Vietnam that I had to give 100 percent of my time to those two major problems. Mr. Nixon resigned; that is disgrace-the first President out of 38 that ever resigned from public office under pressure. So when you look at the penalty that he paid and when you analyze the requirements that I had to spend all of my time working on the economy which was in trouble that I inherited working on our problems in Southeast Asia which were still plaguing us it seemed to me that Mr. Nixon had been penalized enough by his resignation in disgrace. And the need and necessity for me to concentrate on the problems of the country fully justified the action that I took. MR. REYNOLDS. I take it then sir that you do not believe that you are going to reconsider and think about those 90000 who are still abroad? Have they not been penalized enough? Many of them have been there for years. THE PRESIDENT. Well Mr. Carter has indicated that he would give a blanket pardon to all draft evaders. I do not agree with that point of view. I gave in September of 1974 an opportunity for all draft evaders all deserters to come in voluntarily clear their records by earning an opportunity to restore their good citizenship. I think we gave them a good opportunity. I don't think we should go any further. THE MODERATOR.. Governor Carter. MR. CARTER. Well I think it's very difficult for President Ford to explain the difference between the pardon of President Nixon and his attitude toward those who violated the draft laws. As a matter of fact now I don't advocate amnesty; I advocate pardon. There is a difference in my opinion and in accordance with the ruling of the Supreme Court and in accordance with the definition in the dictionary. Amnesty means that what you did was right. Pardon means that what you did whether it's right or wrong you are forgiven for it. And I do advocate a pardon for draft evaders. I think it's accurate to say that 2 years ago when Mr. Ford put in this amnesty that three times as many deserters were excused as were the ones who evaded the draft. But I think that now is the time to heal our country after the Vietnam war. And I think that what the people are concerned about is not the pardon or the amnesty of those who evaded the draft but whether or not our crime system is fair. We have got a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime. The big shots who are rich who are influential very seldom go to jail. Those who are poor and who have no influence quite often are the ones who are punished. And the whole subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much. And I believe that the fairness of it is what is the major problem that addresses our leader and this is something that hasn't been addressed adequately by this administration. But I hope to have a complete responsibility on my shoulders to help bring' about a fair criminal justice system and also to bring about an end to the divisiveness that has occurred in our country as a result of the Vietnam war. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Gannon. MR. GANNON. Governor Carter you have promised a sweeping overhaul of the Federal Government including a reduction in the number of Government agencies you say would go down to about 200 from some 1900. That sounds indeed like a very deep cut in the Federal Government. But isn't it a fact that you are not really talking about fewer Federal employees or less Government spending but rather that you are talking about reshaping the Federal Government not making it smaller? MR. CARTER. Well I've been through this before Mr. Gannon as the Governor of Georgia. When I took over we had a bureaucratic mess like we have in Washington now. And we had 300 agencies departments bureaus commissions-some fully budgeted some not-but all having responsibility to carry out that was in conflict. And we cut those 300 agencies and so forth down substantially; we eliminated 278 of them. We set up a simple structure of government that could be administered fairly and it was a tremendous success. It hasn't been undone since I was there. It resulted also in an ability to reshape our court system our prison system our education system our mental health programs and a clear assignment of responsibility and authority and also to have our people once again understand and control our Government. I intend to do the same thing if I am elected President. When I get to Washington coming in as an outsider one of the major responsibilities that I will have on my shoulder is a complete reorganization of the executive branch of Government. We now have a greatly expanded White House staff. When Mr. Nixon went in office for instance we had $3 1/2 million spent on the White House and its staff. That has escalated now to $16?? million in the last Republican administration. This needs to be changed. We need to put the responsibilities back on the Cabinet members. We also need to have a great reduction in agencies and programs. For instance we now have in the health area 302 different programs administered by 11 major departments and agencies. Sixty other advisory commissions are responsible for this. Medicaid is in one agency; Medicare is in a different one; the check on the quality of health care is in a different one. None of them are responsible for health care itself. This makes it almost impossible for us to have a good health program. We have just advocated this past week a consolidation of the responsibilities for energy. Our country now has no comprehensive energy program or policy. We have 20 different agencies in the Federal Government responsible for the production the regulation the information about energy the conservation of energy spread all over Government. This is a gross waste of money. So tough competent management of Government giving us a simple efficient purposeful and manageable Government will be a great step forward. And if I am elected-and I intend to be-then it's going to be done. MR. GANNON. Well I'd like to press my question on the number of Federal employees-whether you would really plan to reduce the overall number or merely put them in different departments and relabel them? In your energy plan you consolidate a number of agencies into one or you would but does that really change the overall? MR. CARTER. I can't say for sure that we would have fewer Federal employees when I go out of office than when I come in. It took me about 3 years to completely reorganize the Georgia government. The last year I was in office our budget was actually less than it was a year before which showed a great improvement. Also we had a 2-percent increase in the number of employees the last year but it was a tremendous shift from administrative jobs into the delivery of services. For instance we completely revised our prison system. We established 84 new mental health treatment centers and we shifted people out of administrative jobs into the field to deliver better services. The same thing will be done at the Federal Government level. I accomplished this with substantial reductions in employees in some departments. For instance in the Transportation Department we cut back about 25 percent of the total number of employees. In giving our people better mental health care we increased the number of employees. But the efficiency of it the simplicity of it the ability of people to understand their own government and control it was a substantial benefit derived from complete reorganization. We have got to do this at the Federal Government level. If we don't the bureaucratic mess is going to continue. There is no way for our people now to understand what their Government is; there is no way to get the answer to a question. When you come to Washington to try to-as a Governor-to try to begin a new program for your people like the treatment of drug addicts I found there were 13 different Federal agencies that I had to go to to manage the drug treatment program. In the Georgia government we only had one agency responsible for drug treatment. This is the kind of change that would be made. And it would be of tremendous benefit in long-range planning in tight budgeting saving the taxpayers' money making the Government more efficient cutting down on bureaucratic waste having a clear delineation of authority and responsibility of employees and giving our people a better chance to understand and control their Government. THE MODERATOR. President Ford. THE PRESIDENT. I think the record should show Mr. Newman that the Bureau of Census-we checked it just yesterday-indicates that in the 4 years that Governor Carter was Governor of the State of Georgia expenditures by the government went up over 50 percent. Employees of the government in Georgia during his term of office went up over 25 percent. And the figures also show that the bonded indebtedness of the State of Georgia during his Governorship went up over 20 percent. And there was some very interesting testimony given by Governor Carter's successor Governor Busbee before a Senate committee a few months ago on how he found the Medicaid program when he came into office following Governor Carter. He testified and these are his words the present Governor of Georgia he says he found the Medicaid program in Georgia in shambles. Now let me talk about what we've done in the White House as far as Federal employees are concerned. The first order that I issued after I became President was to cut or eliminate the prospective 40000 increase in Federal employees that had been scheduled by my predecessor. And in the term that I have been President-some 2 years-we have reduced Federal employment by 11000. In the White House staff itself when I became President we had roughly 540 employees. We now have about 485 employees. So we've made a rather significant reduction in the number of employees on the White House staff working for the President. So I think our record of cutting back employees plus the failure on the part of the Governor's program to actually save employment in Georgia shows which is the better plan. THE MODERATOR. Mrs. Drew. Ms. DREW. Mr. President at Vail after the Republican convention you announced that you would now emphasize five new areas. Among those were jobs and housing and health improved recreational facilities for Americans and you also added crime. You also mentioned education. For 2 years you've been telling us that we couldn't do very much in these areas because we couldn't afford it and in fact we do have a $50 billion deficit now. In rebuttal to Governor Carter a little bit earlier you said that if there were to be any surplus in the next few years you thought it should be turned back to the people in the form of tax relief. So how are you going to pay for any new initiatives in these areas you announced at Vail you were going to now stress? THE PRESIDENT. Well in the last 2 years as I indicated before we had a very tough time. We were faced with heavy inflation-over 12 percent; we were faced with substantial unemployment. But in the last 24 months we've turned the economy around and we've brought inflation down to under 6 percent. And we have added employment of about 4 million in the last 17 months to the point where we have 88 million people working in America today the most in the history of the country. The net result is we are going to have some improvement in our receipts and I think we will have some decrease in our disbursements. We expect to have a lower deficit in fiscal year 1978. We feel that with this improvement in the economy we feel with more receipts and fewer disbursements we can in a moderate way increase as I recommended over the next 10 years a new parks program that would cost a billion and a half dollars doubling our national park system. We have recommended that in the housing program we can reduce down payments and moderate monthly payments. But that doesn't cost any more as far as the Federal Treasury is concerned. We believe that we can do a better job in the area of crime but that requires tougher sentencing-mandatory certain prison sentences for those who violate our criminal laws. We believe that you can revise the Federal Criminal Code which has not been revised in a good many years. That doesn't cost any more m
