Good evening. I am Pauline Frederick of NPR [National Public Radio] moderator of the second of the historic debates of the 1976 campaign between Gerald R. Ford of Michigan Republican candidate for President and Jimmy Carter of Georgia Democratic candidate for President. Thank you President Ford and thank you Governor Carter for being with us tonight. The debate takes place before an audience in the Palace of Fine Arts Theatre in San Francisco. An estimated 100 million Americans are watching on television as well. San Francisco was the site of the signing of the United Nations Charter 31 years ago. Thus it is an appropriate place to hold this debate the subject of which is foreign and defense issues. The questioners tonight are Max Frankel associate editor of the New York Times Henry L. Trewhitt diplomatic correspondent of the Baltimore Sun and Richard Valeriani diplomatic correspondent of NBC News. The ground rules tonight are basically the same as they were for the first debate 2 weeks ago. The questions will be alternated between candidates. By the toss of a coin Governor Carter will take the first question. Each question sequence will be as follows: The question will be asked and the candidate will have up to 3 minutes to answer. His opponent will have up to 2 minutes to respond. And prior to the response the questioner may ask a follow-up question to clarify the candidate's answer when necessary with up to 2 minutes to reply. Each candidate will have 3 minutes for a closing statement at the end. President Ford and Governor Carter do not have notes or prepared remarks with them this evening but they may take notes during the debate and refer to them. Mr. Frankel you have the first question for Governor Carter. MR. FRANKEL. Governor since the Democrats last ran our foreign policy including many of the men who are advising you the country has been relieved of the Vietnam agony and the military draft; we've started arms control negotiations with the Russians; we've opened relations with China; we've arranged the disengagement in the Middle East; we've regained influence with the Arabs without deserting Israel. Now maybe we've even begun a process of peaceful change in Africa. Now you've objected in this campaign to the style with which much of this was done and you've mentioned some other things that you think ought to have been done. But do you really have a quarrel with this Republican record? Would you not have done any of those things? MR. CARTER. Well I think this Republican administration has been almost all style and spectacular and not substance. We've got a chance tonight to talk about first of all leadership the character of our country and a vision of the future. In every one of these instances the Ford administration has failed. And I hope tonight that I and Mr. Ford will have a chance to discuss the reason for those failures. Our country is not strong any more; we're not respected any more. We can only be strong overseas if we're strong at home and when I become President we'll not only be strong in those areas but also in defense--a defense capability second to none. We've lost in our foreign policy the character of the American people. We've ignored or excluded the American people and the Congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy. It's been one of secrecy and exclusion. In addition to that we've had a chance to become now contrary to our long-standing beliefs and principles the arms merchant of the whole world. We've tried to buy success from our enemies and at the same time we've excluded from the process the normal friendship of our allies. In addition to that we've become fearful to compete with the Soviet Union on an equal basis. We talk about detente. The Soviet Union knows what they want in detente and they've been getting it. We have not known what we've wanted and we've been out-traded in almost every instance. The other point I want to make is about our defense. We've got to be a nation blessed with the defense capability that's efficient tough capable well organized narrowly focused fighting capability. The ability to fight if necessary is the best way to avoid the chance for or the requirement to fight. And the last point I want to make is this: Mr. Ford Mr. Kissinger have continued on with the policies and failures of Richard Nixon. Even the Republican platform has criticized the lack of leadership in Mr. Ford and they've criticized the foreign policy of this administration. This is one instance where I agree with the Republican platform. I might say this in closing and that is that as far as foreign policy goes Mr. Kissinger has been the President of this country. Mr. Ford has shown an absence of leadership and an absence of a grasp of what this country is and what it ought to be. That's got to be changed and that is one of the major issues in this campaign of 1976. THE MODERATOR. President Ford would you like to respond? THE PRESIDENT. Governor Carter again is talking in broad generalities. Let me take just one question that he raises--the military strength and capability of the United States. Governor Carter in November of 1975 indicated that he wanted to cut the defense budget by $15 billion. A few months later he said he wanted to cut the defense budget by $8 billion or $9 billion. And more recently he talks about cutting the defense budget by $5 billion to $7 billion. There is no way you can be strong militarily and have those kinds of reductions in our military appropriations. Now let me just tell you a little story. About late October of 1975 I asked the then Secretary of Defense Mr. Schlesinger to tell me what had to be done if we were going to reduce the defense budget by $3 to $5 billion. A few days later Mr. Schlesinger came back and said if we cut the defense budget by $3 to $5 billion we will have to cut military personnel by 250000 civilian personnel by 100000 jobs in America by 100000. We would have to stretch out our aircraft procurement. We would have to reduce our naval construction program. We would have to reduce the research and development for the Army the Navy the Air Force and Marines by 8 percent. We would have to close 20 military bases in the United States immediately. That's the kind of a defense program that Mr. Carter wants. Let me tell you this straight from the shoulder: You don't negotiate with Mr. Brezhnev from weakness. And the kind of a defense program that Mr. Carter wants will mean a weaker defense and a poorer negotiating position. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Trewhitt a question for President Ford. MR. TREWHITT. Mr. President my question really is the other side of the coin from Mr. Frankel's. For a generation the United States has had a foreign policy based on containment of communism; yet we have lost the first war in Vietnam we lost a shoving match in Angola Communists threaten to come to power by peaceful means in Italy and relations generally have cooled with the Soviet Union in the last few months. So let me ask you first what do you do about such cases as Italy and secondly does this general drift mean that we're moving back toward something like an old cold war relationship with the Soviet Union? THE PRESIDENT. I don't believe we should move to a Cold War relationship. I think it's in the best interest of the United States and the world as a whole that the United States negotiate rather than go back to the cold war relationship with the Soviet Union. I don't look at the picture as bleakly as you have indicated in your question Mr. Trewhitt. I believe that the United States has had many successes in recent years and recent months as far as the Communist movement is concerned. We have been successful in Portugal where a year ago it looked like there was a very great possibility that the Communists would take over in Portugal. It didn't happen. We have a democracy in Portugal today. A few months ago--or I should say maybe 2 years ago--the Soviet Union looked like they had continued strength in the Middle East. Today according to Prime Minister Rabin the Soviet Union is weaker in the Middle East than they have been in many many years. The facts are the Soviet Union relationship with Egypt is at a low level; the Soviet Union relationship with Syria is at a very low point. The United States today according to Prime Minister Rabin of Israel is at a peak in its influence and power in the Middle East. But let's turn for a minute to the southern African operations that are now going on. The United States of America took the initiative in southern Africa. We wanted to end the bloodshed in southern Africa. We wanted to have the right of self-determination in southern Africa. We wanted to have majority rule with the full protection of the rights of the minority. We wanted to pro. serve human dignity in southern Africa. We have taken initiative and in southern Africa today the United States is trusted by the black frontline nations and black Africa. The United States is trusted by the other elements in southern Africa. The United States foreign policy under this administration has been one of progress and success. And I believe that instead of talking about Soviet progress we can talk about American successes. And may I make an observation--part of the question you asked Mr. Trewhitt--I don't believe that it's in the best interests of the United States and the NATO nations to have a Communist government in NATO. Mr. Carter has indicated he would look with sympathy to a Communist government in NATO. I think that would destroy the integrity and the strength of NATO and I am totally opposed to it. MR. CARTER. Well Mr. Ford unfortunately has just made a statement that's not true. I have never advocated a Communist government for Italy; that would obviously be a ridiculous thing for anyone to do who wanted to be President of the country. I think that this is an instance for deliberate distortion and this has occurred also in the question about defense. As a matter of fact I've never advocated any cut of $15 billion in our defense budget. As a matter of fact Mr. Ford has made a political football out of the defense budget. About a year ago he cut the Pentagon budget $6.8 billion. After he fired James Schlesinger the political heat got so great that he added back about $3 billion. When Ronald Reagan won the Texas primary election Mr. Ford added back another $1 1/2 billion. Immediately before the Kansas City convention he added back another $1.8 billion in the defense budget. And his own Office of Management and Budget testified that he had a $3 billion cut insurance added to the defense budget under the pressure from the Pentagon. Obviously this is another indication of trying to use the defense budget for political purposes which he's trying to do tonight. Now we went into South Africa late after Great Britain Rhodesia the black nations had been trying to solve this problem for many many years. We didn't go in until right before the election similar to what was taking place in 1972 when Mr. Kissinger announced peace is at hand just before the election at that time. And we have weakened our position in NATO because the other countries in Europe supported the democratic forces in Portugal long before we did. We stuck to the Portugal dictatorships much longer than other democracies did in this world. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Valeriani a question for Governor Carter. MR. VALERIANI. Governor Carter much of what the United States does abroad is done in the name of the national interest. What is your concept of the national interest? What should the role of the United States in the world be? And in that connection considering your limited experience in foreign affairs and the fact that you take some pride in being a Washington outsider don't you think it would be appropriate for you to tell the American voters before the election the people that you would like to have in key positions such as Secretary of State Secretary of Defense national security affairs adviser at the White House? MR. CARTER. Well I'm not going to name my Cabinet before I get elected; I've got a little ways to go before I start doing that. But I have an adequate background I believe. I am a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy the first military graduate since Eisenhower. I've served as Governor of Georgia and have traveled extensively in foreign countries--in South America Central America Europe the Middle East and in Japan. I've traveled the last 21 months among the people of this country. I've talked to them and I've listened. And I've seen at firsthand in a very vivid way the deep hurt that's come to this country in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia and Chile and Pakistan and Angola and Watergate CIA revelations. What we were formerly so proud of--the strength of our country its moral integrity the representation in foreign affairs of what our people are what our Constitution stands for--has been gone. And in the secrecy that has surrounded our foreign policy in the last few years the American people and the Congress have been excluded. I believe I know what this country ought to be. I've been one who's loved my Nation as many Americans do. And I believe that there is no limit placed on what we can be in the future if we can harness the tremendous resources-militarily economically--and the stature of our people the meaning of our Constitution in the future. Every time we've made a serious mistake in foreign affairs it's been because the American people have been excluded from the process. If we can just tap the intelligence and ability the sound commonsense and the good judgment of the American people we can once again have a foreign policy to make us proud instead of ashamed. And I'm not going to exclude the American people from that process in the future as Mr. Ford and Kissinger have done. This is what it takes to have a sound foreign policy: strong at home strong defense permanent commitments not betray the principles of our country and involve the American people and the Congress in the shaping of our foreign policy. Every time Mr. Ford speaks from a position of secrecy--in negotiations and secret treaties that have been pursued and achieved in supporting dictatorships in ignoring human rights--we are weak and the rest of the world knows it. So these are the ways that we can restore the strength of our country. And they don't require long experience in foreign policy--nobody has that except a President who served a long time or a Secretary of State. But my background my experience my knowledge of the people of this country my commitment to our principles that don't change--those are the best bases to correct the horrible mistakes of this administration and restore our own country to a position of leadership in the world. MR. VALERIANI. How specifically Governor are you going to bring the American people into the decisionmaking process in foreign policy? What does that mean? MR. CARTER. First of all I would quit conducting the decisionmaking process in secret as has been a characteristic of Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Ford. In many instances we've made agreements like in Vietnam that have been revealed later on to our embarrassment. Recently Ian Smith the President of Rhodesia announced that he had unequivocal commitments from Mr. Kissinger that he could not reveal. The American people don't know what those commitments are. We've seen in the past a destruction of elected governments like in Chile and the strong support of military dictatorship there. These kinds of things have hurt us very much. I would restore the concept of the fireside chat which was an integral part of the administration of Franklin Roosevelt. And I would also restore the involvement of the Congress. When Harry Truman was President he was not afraid to have a strong Secretary of Defense--Dean Acheson George Marshall were strong Secretaries of State--excuse me State. But he also made sure that there was a bipartisan support. The Members of Congress Arthur Vandenburg Walter George were part of the process. And before our Nation made a secret agreement and before we made a bluffing statement we were sure that we had the backing not only of the President and the Secretary of State but also of the Congress and the people. This is a responsibility of the President and I think it's very damaging to our country for Mr. Ford to have turned over this responsibility to the Secretary of State. THE MODERATOR. President Ford do you have a response? THE PRESIDENT. Governor Carter again contradicts himself. He complains about secrecy and yet he is quoted as saying that in the attempt to find a solution in the Middle East that he would hold unpublicized meetings with the Soviet Union--I presume for the purpose of imposing a settlement on Israel and the Arab nations. But let me talk just a minute about what we've done to avoid secrecy in the Ford administration. After the United States took the initiative in working with Israel and with Egypt and achieving the Sinai II agreement--and I am proud to say that not a single Egyptian or Israeli soldier has lost his life since the signing of the Sinai agreement--but at the time that I submitted the Sinai agreement to the Congress of the United States I submitted every single document that was applicable to the Sinai II agreement. It was the most complete documentation by any President of any agreement signed by a President on behalf of the United States. Now as far as meeting with the Congress is concerned during the 24 months that I've been the President of the United States I have averaged better than one meeting a month with responsible groups or committees of the Congress both House and Senate. The Secretary of State has appeared in the several years that he's been the Secretary before 80 different committee hearings in the House and in the Senate. The Secretary of State has made better than 50 speeches all over the United States explaining American foreign policy. I have made myself at least 10 speeches in various parts of the country where I have discussed with the American people defense and foreign policy. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Frankel a question for President Ford. MR. FRANKEL. Mr. President I'd like to explore a little more deeply our relationship with the Russians. They used to brag back in Khrushchev's day that because of their greater patience and because of our greed for business deals that they would sooner or later get the better of us. Is it possible that despite some setbacks in the Middle East they've proved their point? Our allies in France and Italy are now flirting with communism; we've recognized a permanent Communist regime in East Germany; we virtually signed in Helsinki an agreement that the Russians have dominance in Eastern Europe; we bailed out Soviet agriculture with our huge grain sales we've given them large loans access to our best technology and if the Senate hadn't interfered with the Jackson Amendment maybe you would have given them even larger loans. Is that what you call a two-way street of traffic in Europe? THE PRESIDENT. I believe that we have negotiated with the Soviet Union since I've been President from a position of strength. And let me cite several examples. Shortly after I became President in December of 1974 I met with General Secretary Brezhnev in Vladivostok. And we agreed to a mutual cap on the ballistic missile launchers at a ceiling of 2400 which means that the Soviet Union if that becomes a permanent agreement will have to make a reduction in their launchers that they now have or plan to have. I negotiated at Vladivostok with Mr. Brezhnev a limitation on the MIRVing of their ballistic missiles at a figure of 1320 which is the first time that any President has achieved a cap either on launchers or on MIRV's. It seems to me that we can go from there to the grain sales. The grain sales have been a benefit to American agriculture. We have achieved a 5 3/4-year sale of a minimum of 6 million metric tons which means that they have already bought about 4 million metric tons this year and are bound to buy another 2 million metric tons to take the grain and corn and wheat that the American farmers have produced in order to have full production. And these grain sales to the Soviet Union have helped us tremendously in meeting the cost of the additional oil and the oil that we have bought from overseas. If we turn to Helsinki--I am glad you raised it Mr. Frankel--in the case of Helsinki 35 nations signed an agreement including the Secretary of State for the Vatican. I can't under any circumstances believe that His Holiness the Pope would agree by signing that agreement that the 35 nations have turned over to the Warsaw Pact nations the domination of Eastern Europe. It just isn't true. And if Mr. Carter alleges that His Holiness by signing that has done it he is totally inaccurate. Now what has been accomplished by the Helsinki agreement? Number one we have an agreement where they notify us and we notify them of any military maneuvers that are to be undertaken. They have done it in both cases where they've done so. There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford administration. MR. FRANKEL. I'm sorry could I just follow--did I understand you to say sir that the Russians are not using Eastern Europe as their own sphere of influence and occupying most of the countries there and making sure with their troops that it's a Communist zone whereas on our side of the line the Italians and the French are still flirting with the possibility of communism? THE PRESIDENT. I don't believe Mr. Frankel that the Yugoslavians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don't believe that the Romanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don't believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. Each of those countries is independent autonomous; it has its own territorial integrity. And the United States does not concede that those countries are under the domination of the Soviet Union. As a matter of fact I visited Poland Yugoslavia and Romania to make certain that the people of those countries understood that the President of the United States and the people of the United States are dedicated to their independence their autonomy and their freedom. THE MODERATOR. Governor Carter have you a response? MR. CARTER. Well in the first place I am not criticizing His Holiness the Pope. I was talking about Mr. Ford. The fact is that secrecy has surrounded the decisions made by the Ford administration. In the case of the Helsinki agreement it may have been a good agreement at the beginning but we have failed to enforce the so-called Basket 3 part which ensures the right of people to migrate to join their families to be free to speak out. The Soviet Union is still jamming Radio Free Europe. Radio Free Europe is being jammed. We've also seen a very serious problem with the so-called Sonnenfeldt document which apparently Mr. Ford has just endorsed which said that there is an organic linkage between the Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union. And I would like to see Mr. Ford convince the Polish Americans and the Czech Americans and the Hungarian Americans in this county that those countries don't live under the domination and supervision of the Soviet Union behind the Iron Curtain. We also have seen Mr. Ford exclude himself from access to the public. He hasn't had a tough cross-examination-type press conference in over 30 days. One press conference he had without sound. He's also shown a weakness in yielding to pressure. The Soviet Union for instance put pressure on Mr. Ford and he refused to see a symbol of human freedom recognized around the world--Alexander Solzhenitsyn. The Arabs have put pressure on Mr. Ford and he's yielded and he has permitted a boycott by the Arab countries of American businesses who trade with Israel who have American Jews owning or taking part in the management of American companies. His own Secretary of Commerce had to be subpenaed by the Congress to reveal the names of businesses who were subject to this boycott. They didn't volunteer the information; he had to be subpenaed. And the last thing I'd like to say is this: This grain deal with the Soviet Union in '72 was terrible and Mr. Ford made up for it with three embargoes--one against our own ally in Japan. That's not the way to run our foreign policy including international trade. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Trewhitt a question for Governor Carter. MR. TREWHITT. Governor I'd like to pick up on that point actually and on your appeal for a greater measure of American idealism in foreign affairs. Foreign affairs come home to the American public pretty much in such issues as oil embargoes and grain sales that sort of thing. Would you be willing to risk an oil embargo in order to promote human rights in Iran Saudi Arabia--withhold arms from Saudi Arabia for the same purpose? As a matter of fact I think you have perhaps answered this final part but would you withhold grain from the Soviet Union in order to promote civil rights in the Soviet Union? MR. CARTER. I would never single out food as a trade embargo item. If I ever decided to impose an embargo because of a crisis in international relationships it would include all shipments of all equipment. For instance if the Arab countries ever again declare an embargo against our Nation on oil I would consider that not a military but an economic declaration of war. And I would respond instantly and in kind. I would not ship that Arab country anything--no weapons no spare parts for weapons no oil-drilling rigs no oil pipe no nothing. I wouldn't single out just food. Another thing I'd like to say is this: In our international trade as I said in my opening statement we have become the arms merchant of the world. When this Republican administration came into office we were shipping about $1 billion worth of arms overseas; now $10 to $12 billion worth of arms overseas to countries that quite often use these weapons to fight each other. The shift in emphasis has been very disturbing to me speaking about the Middle East. Under the last Democratic administration 60 percent of all weapons that went into the Middle East were for Israel. Nowadays--75 percent were for Israel before--now 60 percent go to the Arab countries and this does not include Iran. If you include Iran our present shipment of weapons to the Middle East--only 20 percent goes to Israel. This is a deviation from idealism; it's a deviation from a commitment to our major ally in the Middle East which is Israel; it's a yielding to economic pressure on the part of the Arabs on the oil issue; and it's also a tremendous indication that under the Ford administration we have not addressed the energy policy adequately. We still have no comprehensive energy policy in this country and it's an overall sign of weakness. When we are weak at home economically--high unemployment high inflation a confused Government a wasteful Defense Establishment-this encourages the kind of pressure that's been put on us successfully. It would have been inconceivable 10 15 years ago for us to be brought to our knees with an Arab oil embargo. But it was done 3 years ago and they're still putting pressure on us from the Arab countries to our discredit around the world. These are the weaknesses that I see and I believe it's not just a matter of idealism. It's a matter of being tough. It's a matter of being strong. It's a matter of being consistent. Our priorities ought to be first of all to meet our own military needs; secondly to meet the needs of our allies and friends and only then should we ship military equipment to foreign countries. As a matter of fact Iran is going to get 80 F-14's before we even meet our own Air Force orders for F-14's and the shipment of Spruance Class Destroyers to Iran are much more highly sophisticated than the Spruance Class Destroyers that are presently being delivered to our own Navy. This is ridiculous and it ought to be changed. MR. TREWHITT. Governor let me pursue that if I may. If I understand you correctly you would in fact to use my examples withhold arms from Iran and Saudi Arabia even if the risk was an oil embargo and if they should be securing those arms from somewhere else. And then if the embargo came then you would respond in kind. Do I have it correctly? MR. CARTER. If--Iran is not an Arab country as you know it's a Moslem country. But if Saudi Arabia should declare an oil embargo against us then I would consider that an economic declaration of war. And I would make sure that the Saudis understood this ahead of time so there would be no doubt in their mind. I think under those circumstances they would refrain from pushing us to our knees as they did in 1973 with the previous oil embargo. THE MODERATOR. President Ford. THE PRESIDENT. Governor Carter apparently doesn't realize that since I've been President we have sold to the Israelis over $4 billion in military hardware. We have made available to the Israelis over 45 percent of the total economic and military aid since the establishment of Israel 27 years ago. So the Ford administration has done a good job in helping our good ally Israel and we're dedicated to the survival and security of Israel. I believe that Governor Carter doesn't realize the need and necessity for arms sales to Iran. He indicates he would not make those. Iran is bordered very extensively by the Soviet Union. Iran has Iraq as one of its neighbors. The Soviet Union and the Communist-dominated government of Iraq are neighbors of Iran and Iran is an ally of the United States. It's my strong feeling that we ought to sell arms to Iran for its own national security and as an ally a strong ally of the United States. The history of our relationship with Iran goes back to the days of President Truman when he decided that it was vitally necessary for our own security as well as that of Iran that we should help that country. And Iran has been a good ally. In 1973 when there was an oil embargo Iran did not participate; Iran continued to sell oil to the United States. I believe that it's in our interest and in the interest of Israel and Iran and Saudi Arabia for the United States to sell arms to those countries. It's for their security as well as ours. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Valeriani a question for President Ford. MR. VALERIANI. Mr. President the policy of your administration is to normalize relations with mainland China. That means establishing at some point full diplomatic relations and obviously doing something about the mutual defense treaty with Taiwan. If you are elected will you move to establish full diplomatic relations with Peking and will you abrogate the mutual defense treaty with Taiwan? And as a corollary would you provide mainland China with military equipment if the Chinese were to ask for it? THE PRESIDENT. Our relationship with the People's Republic of China is based upon the Shanghai communiqu? ?f 1972. That communiqu? ?alls for the normalization of relations between the United States and the People's Republic. It doesn't set a time schedule; it doesn't make a determination as to how that relationship should be achieved in relationship to our current diplomatic recognition and obligations to the Taiwanese Government. The Shanghai communiqu? ¤oes say that the differences between the People's Republic on the one hand and Taiwan on the other shall be settled by peaceful means. The net result is this administration--and during my time as the President for the next 4 years--we will continue to move for normalization of relations in the traditional sense. And we will insist that the disputes between Taiwan and the People's Republic be settled peacefully as was agreed in the Shanghai communiqu? ?f 1972. The Ford administration will not let down will not eliminate or forget our obligation to the people of Taiwan. We feel that there must be a continued obligation to the people the some 19 or 20 million people in Taiwan and as we move during the next 4 years those will be the policies of this administration. MR. VALERIANI. Sir the military equipment for the mainland Chinese? THE PRESIDENT. There is no policy of this Government to give to the People's Republic or to sell to the People's Republic of China military equipment. I do not believe that we the United States should sell give or otherwise transfer military hardware to the People's Republic of China or any other Communist nations such as the Soviet Union and the like. THE MODERATOR. Governor Carter. MR. CARTER. I'd like to go back just one moment to the
