Good evening I am Barbara Walters moderator of the last of the debates of 1976 between Gerald R. Ford Republican candidate for President and Jimmy Carter Democratic candidate for President. Welcome President Ford welcome Governor Carter and thank you for joining us this evening. This debate takes place before an audience in Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall on the campus of the College of William and Mary in historic Williamsburg Virginia. It is particularly appropriate in this Bicentennial Year that we meet on these grounds to hear this debate. Two hundred years ago five William and Mary students met at nearby Raleigh Tavern to form Phi Beta Kappa a fraternity designed they wrote "to search out and dispel the clouds of falsehood by debating without reserve the issues of the day." In that spirit of debate--"without reserve ....to dispel the clouds of falsehood"--gentlemen let us proceed. The subject matter of this debate is open covering all issues and topics. Our questioners tonight are Joseph Kraft syndicated columnist Robert Maynard editorial writer for the Washington Post and Jack Nelson Washington bureau chief of the Los Angeles Times. The ground rules tonight are as follows: Questioners will alternate questions between the candidates. The candidate has up to 2 1/2 minutes to answer the question. The other candidate then has up to 2 minutes to respond. If necessary a questioner may ask a follow-up question for further clarification and in that case the candidate has up to 2 minutes to respond. As was initially agreed to by both candidates the answers should be responsive to the particular questions. Finally each candidate has up to 3 minutes for a closing statement. President Ford and Governor Carter do not have prepared notes or comments with them this evening but they may make notes and refer to them during the debate. It has been determined that President Ford would take the first question in this last debate and Mr. Kraft you have that first question for President Ford. MR. KRAFT. Mr. President I assume that the Americans all know that these are difficult times and that there is no pie in the sky and that they don't expect something for nothing. So I'd like to ask you as a first question as you look ahead in the next 4 years what sacrifices are you going to call on the American people to make? What price are you going to ask them to pay to realize your objectives? Let me add Governor Carter that if you felt that it was appropriate to answer that question in your comments as to what price it would be appropriate for the American people to pay for a Carter administration I think that would be proper too. Mr. President? THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Kraft I believe that the American people in the next 4 years under a Ford administration will be called upon to make those necessary sacrifices to preserve the peace--which we have--which means of course that we will have to maintain an adequate military capability; which means of course that we will have to add I think a few billion dollars to our defense appropriations to make certain that we have adequate strategic forces adequate conventional forces. I think the American people will be called upon to be in the forefront in giving leadership to the solution of those problems that must be solved in the Middle East in southern Africa and any problems that might arise in the Pacific. The American people will be called upon to tighten their belts a bit in meeting some of the problems that we face domestically. I don't think that America can go on a big spending spree with a whole lot of new programs that would add significantly to the Federal budget. I believe that the American people if given the leadership that I would expect to give would be willing to give this thrust to preserve the peace and the necessary restraint at home to hold the lid on spending so that we could I think have a long overdue and totally justified tax decrease for the middle-income people. And then--with the economy that would be generated from a restraint on spending and a tax reduction primarily for the middle-income people--then I think the American people would be willing to make those sacrifices for peace and prosperity in the next 4 years. MR. KRAFT. Could I be a little bit more specific Mr. President? THE PRESIDENT. Sure sure. MR. KRAFT. Doesn't your policy really imply that we are going to have to have a pretty high rate of unemployment over a fairly long time that growth is going to be fairly slow and that we are not going to be able to do very much in the next 4 or 5 years to meet the basic agenda of our national needs in the cities in health in transit and a whole lot of other things like that? THE PRESIDENT. Not at all. MR. KRAFT. Aren't those the real costs? THE PRESIDENT. No Mr. Kraft. We're spending very significant amounts of money now some $200 billion a year almost 50 percent of our total Federal expenditure by the Federal Government at the present time for human needs. Now we will probably have to increase that to some extent but we don't have to have growth in spending that will blow the lid off and add to the problems of inflation. I believe we can meet the problems within the cities of this country and still give a tax reduction. I proposed as you know a reduction to increase the personal exemption from $750 to $1000 with the fiscal program that I have. And if you look at the projections it shows that we will reduce unemployment that we will continue to win the battle against inflation and at the same time give the kind of quality of life that I believe is possible in America: a job a home for all those that will work and save for it safety in the streets health care that is affordable. These things can be done if we have the right vision and the right restraint and the right leadership. THE MODERATOR. Thank you. Governor Carter your response please. MR. CARTER. Well I might say first of all that I think in case of a Carter administration the sacrifices would be much less. Mr. Ford's own environmental agency has projected a 10-percent unemployment rate by 1978 if be is President. The American people are ready to make sacrifices if they are part of the process if they know that they will be helping to make decisions and won't be excluded from being an involved party to the national purpose. The major effort that we must put forward is to put our people back to work. And I think that this is one example where a lot of people have selfish grasping ideas now. I remember in 1973 in the depth of the energy crisis when President Nixon called on the American people to make a sacrifice to cut down on the waste of gasoline to cut down on the speed of automobiles. It was a tremendous surge of patriotism. "I want to make a sacrifice for my country? I think we could call together--with strong leadership in the White House-business industry and labor and say let's have voluntary price restraints let's lay down some guidelines so we don't have continuing inflation. We could also have an end to the extremes. We now have one extreme for instance of some welfare recipients who by taking advantage of the welfare laws the housing laws the Medicaid laws and the food stamp laws make over $10000 a year and they don't have to pay any taxes on it. At the other extreme just I percent of the richest people in our country derive 25 percent of all the tax benefits. So both those extremes grasp for advantage and the person who has to pay that expense is the middle-income family who is still working for a living. And they have to pay for the rich who have the privilege and for the poor who are not working. But I think that a balanced approach with everybody being part of it and striving for unselfishness could help as it did in 1973 to let people sacrifice for their own country. I know I'm ready for it; I think the American people are too. THE MODERATOR. Thank you. Mr. Maynard your question to Governor Carter. MR. MAYNARD. Governor by all indications the voters are so turned off by this election campaign so far that only half intend to vote. One major reason for this apathetic electorate appears to be the low level at which this campaign bas been conducted. It has digressed frequently from important issues into allegations of blunders and brainwashing and fixations on lust in Playboy. What responsibility do you accept for the low level of this campaign for the Nation's highest office? MR. CARTER. I think the major reason for a decrease in participation that we've experienced ever since 1960 bas been the deep discouragement of the American people about the performance of public officials. When you've got 7 1/2 8 million people out of work when you've got three times as much inflation as you had during the last 8-year Democratic administration when you have the highest deficits in history when you have it becoming increasingly difficult for a family to put a child through college or to own a home there is a natural inclination to be turned off. Also in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia and Watergate and the CIA revelations people have felt that they've been betrayed by public officials. I have to admit that in the heat of the campaign--I've been in 30 primaries during the springtime; I've been campaigning for 22 months--I've made some mistakes. And I think this is part of just being a human being. I have to say that my campaign has been an open one. The Playboy thing bas been of very great concern to me. I don't know how to deal with it exactly. I agreed to give the interview to Playboy. Other people have done it who are notable--Governor Jerry Brown Walter Cronkite Albert Schweitzer Mr. Ford's own Secretary of Treasury Mr. Simon William Buckley many other people. But they weren't running for President. And in retrospect from hindsight I would not have given that interview had I to do it over again. If I should ever decide in the future to discuss my deep Christian beliefs and condemnation and sinfulness l would use another forum besides Playboy. But I can say this: I'm doing the best I can to get away from that. And during the next 10 days the American people will not see the Carter campaign running television advertisements or newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford's character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford's campaign. And I hope that we can leave those issues in the next 10 days about personalities and mistakes of the past--we've both matte some mistakes--and talk about unemployment inflation housing education taxation government organization stripping away of secrecy and the things that are crucial to the American people. I regret the things in my own long campaign that have been mistaken but I'm trying to do away with those the last 10 days. THE MODERATOR. Thank you Governor Carter. President Ford your response? THE PRESIDENT. I believe that the American people have been turned off in this election Mr. Maynard for a variety of reasons. We have seen on Capitol Hill in the Congress a great many allegations of wrongdoing of alleged immorality. Those are very disturbing to the American people. They wonder how an elected representative can serve them and participate in such activities' serving in the Congress of the United States. Yes and I'm certain many many Americans were turned off by the revelations of Watergate a very very bad period of time in American political history. Yes and thousands maybe millions of Americans were turned off because of the problems that came out of our involvement in Vietnam. But on the other hand I found on July 4 of this year a new spirit born in America. We were celebrating our Bicentennial. And I find that there is a movement--as I traveled around the country--of greater interest in this campaign. Now like any hard-working person seeking public office in the campaign inevitably sometimes you will use rather graphic language. And I am guilty of that just like I think most others in the political arena. But I do make a pledge that in the next 10 days when we are asking the American people to make one of the most important decisions in their lifetime because I think this election is one of the most vital in the history of America that we do together what we can to stimulate voter participation. THE MODERATOR. Thank you President Ford. Mr. Nelson your question to President Ford. MR. NELSON. Mr. President you mentioned Watergate and you became President because of Watergate so don't you owe the American people a special obligation to explain in detail your role of limiting one of the original investigations of a Watergate--that was the one by the House Banking Committee? And I know you've answered questions on this before but there are questions. that still remain and I think people want to know what your role was. Will you name the persons you talked to in connection with that investigation and since you say you have no recollection of talking to anyone from the White House would you be willing to open for examination the White House tapes of conversations during that period? THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Nelson I testified before two committees House and Senate on precisely the questions that you have asked. And the testimony under oath was to the effect that I did not talk to Mr. Nixon to Mr. Haldeman to Mr. Ehrlichman or to any of the people at the White House. I said I had no recollection whatsoever of talking with any of the White House legislative liaison people. I indicated under oath that the initiative that I took was at the request of the ranking members of the House Banking and Currency Committee on the Republican side which was a legitimate request and a proper response by me. Now that was gone into by two congressional committees and following that investigation both committees overwhelmingly approved me and both the House and the Senate did likewise. Now in the meantime the Special Prosecutor--within the last few days after an investigation himself--said there was no reason for him to get involved because he found nothing that would justify it. And then just a day or two ago the Attorney General of the United States made a further investigation and came to precisely the same conclusion. Now after all of those investigations by objective responsible people I think the matter is closed once and for all. But to add one other feature: I don't control any of the tapes. Those tapes are in the jurisdiction of the courts and I have no right to say yes or no. But all the committees the Attorney General the Special Prosecutor--all of them have given me a clean bill of health. I think the matter is settled once and for all. MR. NELSON. Well Mr. President if I do say so though the question is that I think you still have not gone into details about what your role in it was. And I don't think there was any question about whether or not there was a criminal prosecution but whether you have told the American people your entire involvement in it and whether you would be willing--even though you don't control the tapes--whether you would be willing to ask that the tapes be released for examination? THE PRESIDENT. That's for the proper authorities who have control over those tapes to make that decision. I have given every bit of evidence answered every question that's been asked me by any Senator or any Member of the House plus the fact that the Special Prosecutor on his own initiation and the Attorney General on his initiation--the highest law enforcement official in this country-all of them have given me a clean bill of health. And I've told everything I know about it. I think the matter is settled once and for all. THE MODERATOR. Governor Carter your response. MR. CARTER. I don't have any response. THE MODERATOR. Thank you. Then we will have the next question from Mr. Kraft to Governor Carter. MR. KRAFT. Governor Carter the next big crisis spot in the world may be Yugoslavia. President Tito is old and sick and there are divisions in his country. It's pretty certain that the Russians are going to do everything they possibly can after Tito dies to force Yugoslavia back into the Soviet camp. But last Saturday you said--and this is a quote--"I would not go to war in Yugoslavia even if the Soviet Union sent in troops." Doesn't that statement practically invite the Russians to intervene in Yugoslavia? Doesn't it discourage Yugoslavs who might be tempted to resist? And wouldn't it have been wiser on your part to say nothing and to keep the Russians in the dark as President Ford did and as I think every President has done since President Truman? MR. CARTER. In the last 2 weeks I've had a chance to talk to two men who have visited the Soviet Union Yugoslavia and China. One is Governor Averell Harriman1 who visited the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia and the other one is James Schlesinger2 whom I think you accompanied to China. I got a complete report back from those countries from these two distinguished gentlemen. 1 Governor of New York 1954-58 and Ambassador at Large 1961 1965-68. 2Secretary of Defense 1973-75. Mr. Harriman talked to the leaders in Yugoslavia and I think it's accurate to say that there is no prospect in their opinion of the Soviet Union invading Yugoslavia should Mr. Tito pass away. The present leadership there is fairly uniform in their purpose. I think it's a close-knit group and I think it would be unwise for us to say that we will go to war in Yugoslavia if the Soviets should invade which I think would be an extremely unlikely thing. I have maintained from the very beginning of my campaign--and this was a standard answer that I made in response to the Yugoslavian question--that I would never go to war become militarily involved in the internal affairs of another country unless our own security was directly threatened. And I don't believe that our security would be directly threatened if the Soviet Union went into Yugoslavia. I don't believe it will happen. I certainly hope it won't. I would take the strongest possible measures short of actual military action there by our own troops but I doubt that that would be an eventuality. MR. KRAFT. One quick follow-up. Did you clear the response you made with Secretary Schlesinger and Governor Harriman? MR. CARTER. No I did not. THE MODERATOR. President Ford your response. THE PRESIDENT. Well I firmly believe Mr. Kraft that it's unwise for a President to signal in advance what options he might exercise if any international problem arose. I think we all recall with some sadness that at the period of the late 1940's early 1950's there were some indications that the United States would not include South Korea in an area of defense. There are some who allege--I can't prove it true or untrue--that such a statement in effect invited the North Koreans to invade South Korea. It's a fact they did. But no President of the United States in my opinion should signal in advance to a prospective enemy what his decision might be or what option he might exercise. It's far better for a person sitting in the White House who has a number of options to make certain that the other side so to speak doesn't know precisely what you're going to do. And therefore that was the reason that I would not identify any particular course of action when I responded to a question a week or so ago. THE MODERATOR. Thank you. Mr. Maynard your question to President Ford please. MR. MAYNARD. Sir this question concerns your administrative performance as President. The other day General George Brown the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff delivered his views on several sensitive subjects among them Great Britain one of this country's oldest allies. He said and I quote him now "Great Britain--it's a pathetic thing it just makes you cry. They are no longer a world power. All they have are generals admirals and bands." Since General Brown's comments have caused this country embarrassment in the past why is he still this Nation's leading military officer? THE PRESIDENT. I have indicated to General Brown that the words that he used in that interview in that particular case and in several others were very ill-advised. And General Brown has indicated his apology his regrets and I think that will in this situation settle the matter. It is tragic that the full transcript of that interview was not released and that there were excerpts some of the excerpts taken out of context--not this one however--that you bring up. General Brown has an exemplary record of military performance. He served this Nation with great great skill and courage and bravery for 35 years. And I think it's the consensus of the people who are knowledgeable in the military field that he is probably the outstanding military leader and strategist that we have in America today. Now he did use ill-advised words. But I think in the fact that he apologized that he was reprimanded does permit him to stay on and continue that kind of leadership that we so badly need as we enter into negotiations under the SALT II agreement or if we have operations that might be developing in the Middle East or in southern Africa or in the Pacific--we need a man with that experience that knowledge that know-how. And I think in light of the fact that he has apologized would not have justified my asking for his resignation. THE MODERATOR. Thank you. Governor Carter your response. MR. CARTER. Well just briefly I think this is the second time that General Brown has made a statement for which he did have to apologize--and I know that everybody makes mistakes. I think the first one was related to the unwarranted influence of American Jews on the media and in the Congress. This one concerned Great Britain. I think he said Israel was a military burden on us and that Iran hoped to reestablish the Persian Empire. I am not sure that I remembered earlier that President Ford had expressed his concern about the statement or apologized for it. This is something though that I think is indicative of a need among the American people to know how the Commander in Chief the President feels. And I think the only criticism that I would have of Mr. Ford is that immediately when the statement was revealed perhaps a statement from the President would have been a clarifying and a very beneficial thing. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Nelson your question now to Governor Carter. MR. NELSON. Governor despite the fact that you've been running for President a long time now many Americans still seem to be uneasy about you. They don't feel that they know you or the people around you. And one problem seems to be that you haven't reached out to bring people with broad background or national experience into your campaign or your Presidential plans. Most of the people around you on a day-to-day basis are the people you've known in Georgia. Many of them are young and relatively inexperienced in national affairs. Doesn't this raise a serious question as to whether you would bring into a Carter administration people with the necessary background to run the Federal Government? MR. CARTER. I don't believe it does. I began campaigning 22 months ago. At that time nobody thought I had a chance to win. Very few people knew who I was. I came from a tiny town as you know--Plains--and didn't hold public office didn't have very much money. And my first organization was just four or five people plus my wife and my children my three sons and their wives. And we won the nomination by going out into the streets barbershops beauty parlors restaurants stores in factory shift lines also in farmers' markets and livestock sale barns and we talked a lot and we listened a lot and we learned from the American people. We built up an awareness among the voters of this country particularly those in whose primaries I entered--30 of them nobody has ever done that before--about who I was and what I stood for. Now we have a very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics and foreign affairs defense matters health education welfare government reorganization-I'd say several hundred of them and they are very fine and very highly qualified. The one major decision that I have made since acquiring the nomination-and I share this with President Ford--is the choice of the Vice President. I think this would be indicative of the kind of leaders that I would choose to help me if I am elected. I chose Senator Walter Mondale. And the only criterion that I have put forward in my own mind was who among the several million people in this country would be the best person qualified to be President if something should happen to me and to join me in being Vice President if I should serve out my term? And I'm convinced now more than I was when I got the nomination that Walter Mondale was the right choice. And I believe this is a good indication of the kind of people that I would choose in the future. Mr. Ford has had that same choice to make. I don't want to say anything critical of Senator Dole but I have never heard Mr. Ford say that that was his primary consideration--who is the best person I could choose in this country to be President of the United States. I feel completely at ease knowing that some day Senator Mondale might very well be President. In the last five Vice-Presidential nominees incumbents three of them have become President. But I think this is indicative of what I would do. THE MODERATOR. President Ford your response please. THE PRESIDENT. The Governor may not have heard my established criteria for the selection of a Vice President but it was a well-established criteria that the person I selected would be fully qualified to be President of the United States. And Senator Bob Dole is so qualified--16 years in the House of Representatives and in the Senate very high responsibilities on important committees. I don't mean to be critical of Senator Mondale but I was very very surprised when I read that Senator Mondale made a very derogatory very personal comment about General Brown after the news story that broke about General Brown. If my recollection is correct he indicated that General Brown was not qualified to be a sewer commissioner. I don't think that's a proper way to describe a Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who has fought for his country for 35 years. And I'm sure the Governor would agree with me on that. I think Senator Dole would show more good judgment and discretion than to so describe a heroic and brave and very outstanding leader of the military. So I think our selection of Bob Dole as Vice President is based on merit. And if he should ever become the President of the United States with his vast experience as a Member of the House and a Member of the Senate as well as a Vice President I think he would do an outstanding job as President of the United States. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Kraft your question to President Ford. MR. KRAFT. Mr. President let me assure you and maybe some of the viewing audience that being on this panel hasn't been as it may seem all torture and agony. One of the heartening things is that I and my colleagues have received literally hundreds and maybe even thousands of suggested questions from ordinary citizens all across the country who want answers. THE PRESIDENT. That's a tribute to their interest in this election. MR. KRAFT. I will give you that. But let me go on because one main subject on the minds of all of them has been the environment particularly curious about your record. People 'really want to know why you vetoed the strip mining bill. They want to know why you worked against strong controls on auto emissions. They want to know why you aren't doing anything about pollution of the Atlantic Ocean. They want to know why a bipartisan organization such as the National League of Conservation Voters says that when it comes to environmental issues you are--and I am quoting--"hopeless." THE PRESIDENT. First let me set the record straight. I vetoed the strip mining bill Mr. Kraft because it was the overwhelming consensus of knowledgeable people that that strip mining bill would have meant the loss of literally thousands of jobs something around 140000 jobs. Number two that strip mining bill would have severely set back our need for more coal and Governor Carter has said repeatedly that coal is the resource that we need to use more in the effort to become independent of the Arab oil supplies. So I vetoed it because of a loss of jobs and because it would have interfered with our energy independence program. The auto emissions--it was agreed by Leonard Woodcock the head of the UAW and by the heads of all of the automobile industry--we had labor and management together saying that those auto emission standards had to be modified. But let's talk about what the Ford administration has done in the field of environment. I have increased as President by over 60 percent the funding for water treatment plants in the United States the Federal contribution. I have fully funded the land and water conservation program; in fact have recommended and the Congress approved a substantially increased land and water conservation program. I have added in the current year budget the funds for the National Park Service. For example we proposed about $12 million to add between 400 and 500 more employees for the National Park Service. And a month or so ago I did likewise say over the next 10 years we should expand--double--the national parks the wilderness areas the scenic river areas. And then of course the final thing is that I have signed and approved of more scenic rivers more wilderness areas since I've been President than any other President in the history of the United States. THE MODERATOR. Governor Carter. MR. CARTER. Well I might say I think the League of Conservation Voters is absolutely right. This administration's record of environment is very bad. I think it's accurate to say that the strip mining law which was passed twice by the Congress and only lacked two votes I believe of being overridden would have been good for the country. The claim that it would have put 140000 miners out of work is hard to believe when at the time Mr. Ford vetoed it the United Mine Workers was supporting the bill. And I don't think they would have supported the bill had they known that they would lose 140000 jobs. There has been a consistent policy on the part of this administration to lower or to delay enforcement of air pollution standards and water pollution standards. And under both Presidents Nixon and Ford moneys have been impounded that would have gone to cities and others to control water pollution. We have no energy policy. We I think are the only developed nation in the world that has no comprehensive energy policy to permit us to plan in an orderly way how to shift from increasing the scarce energy forms--oil--and have research and development concentrated on the increased use of coal which I strongly favor--the research and development to be used primarily to make the coal burning be clean. We need a heritage trust program similar to the one we had in Georgia to set aside additional lands that have geological and archeological importance natural areas for enjoyment. The lands that Mr. Ford brags about having approved are in Alaska and they are enormous in size but as far as the accessibility of them by the American people is very far in the future. We have taken no strong position in the control of pollution of our oceans. And I would say the worst threat to the environment of all is nuclear proliferation. And this administration having been in office now for 2 years or more has still not taken a strong and bold action to stop the proliferation of nuclear waste around the world particularly plutonium. Those are some brief remarks about the failures of this administration. I would do the opposite in every respect. THE MODERATOR. Mr. Maynard to Governor Carter. MR. MAYNARD. Governor Federal policy in this country since World War II has tended to favor the development of suburbs at the great expense of central cities. Does not the Federal Government now have an affirmative obligation to revitalize the American city? We have heard little in this campaign suggesting that you have an urban reconstruction program. Could you please outline your urban intentions for us tonight? MR. CARTER. Yes I would be glad to. In the first place as is the case with the environmental policy and energy policy that I just described and the policy for nonproliferation of nuclear waste this administration has no urban policy. It's impossible for mayors or Governors to cooperate with the President because they can't anticipate what 
