MR. SMITH. The League of Women Voters is pleased to welcome to the Cleveland Ohio Convention Center Music Hall President Jimmy Carter the Democratic Party's candidate for reelection to the Presidency and Governor Ronald Reagan of California the Republican Party's candidate for the Presidency. The candidates will debate questions on domestic economic foreign policy and national security issues. The questions are going to be posed by a panel of distinguished journalists who are here with me. They are: Marvin Stone the editor of U.S. News and World Report; Harry Ellis national correspondent of the Christian Science Monitor; William Hilliard assistant managing editor of the Portland Oregonian; Barbara Walters correspondent ABC News. The ground rules for this as agreed by you gentlemen are these: Each panelist down here will ask a question the same question to each of the two candidates. After the two candidates have answered a panelist will ask followup questions to try to sharpen the answers. The candidates will then have an opportunity each to make a rebuttal. That will constitute the first half of the debate and I will state the rules for the second half later on. Some other rules: The candidates are not permitted to bring prepared notes to the podium but are permitted to make notes during the debate. If the candidates exceed the allotted time agreed on I will reluctantly but certainly interrupt. We ask the Convention Center audience here to abide by one ground rule: Please do not applaud or express approval or disapproval during the debate. Now based on a toss of the coin Governor Reagan will respond to the first question from Marvin Stone. U.S. ARMED FORCES MR. STONE. Governor as you're well aware the question of war and peace has emerged as a central issue in this campaign in the give-and-take of recent weeks. President Carter's been criticized for responding late to aggressive Soviet impulses for insufficient buildup of our Armed Forces and a paralysis in dealing with Afghanistan and Iran. You have been criticized for being all too quick to advocate the use of lots of muscle military action to deal with foreign crises. Specifically what are the differences between the two of you on the uses of American military power? GOVERNOR REAGAN. I don't know what the differences might be because I don't know what Mr. Carter's policies are. I do know what he has said about mine. And I'm only here to tell you that I believe with all my heart that our first priority must be world peace and that use of force is always and only a last resort when everything else has failed and then only with regard to our national security. Now I believe also that this meeting this mission this responsibility for preserving the peace which I believe is a responsibility peculiar to our country that we cannot shirk our responsibility as the leader of the Free World because we're the only one that can do it. And therefore the burden of maintaining the peace falls on us. And to maintain that peace requires strength. America has never gotten in a war because we were too strong. We can get into a war by letting events get out of hand as they have in the last 3?? years under the foreign policies of this administration of Mr. Carter's until we're faced each time with a crisis. And good management in preserving the peace requires that we control the events and try to intercept before they become a crisis. But I have seen four wars in my lifetime. I'm a father of sons; I have a grandson. I don't ever want to see another generation of young Americans bleed their lives into sandy beachheads in the Pacific or rice paddies and jungles in Asia or the muddy bloody battlefields of Europe. MR. SMITH. Mr. Stone do you have a followup question for the Governor? MR. STONE. Yes. Governor we've been hearing that the defense buildup that you would associate yourself with would cost tens of billions of dollars more than is now contemplated. In assuming that the American people are ready to bear this cost they nevertheless keep asking the following question: How do you reconcile huge increases in military outlays with your promise of substantial tax cuts and of balancing the budget which in this fiscal year the one that just ended ran more than $60 billion in the red? GOVERNOR REAGAN. Mr. Stone I have submitted an economic plan that I've worked out in concert with a number of fine economists in this country all of whom approve it and believe that over a 5-year projection this plan can permit the extra spending for needed refurbishing of our defensive posture that it can provide for a balanced budget by 1983 if not earlier and that we can afford-along with the cuts that I have proposed in Government spending — we can afford the tax cuts I have proposed — and probably mainly because Mr. Carter's economic policy has built into the next 5 years and on beyond that a tax increase that will be taking $86 billion more next year out of the people's pockets than was taken this year. And my tax cut does not come close to eliminating that $86 billion increase. I'm only reducing the amount of the increase. In other words what I'm talking about is not putting Government back to getting less money than Government's been getting but simply cutting the increase in spending. MR. SMITH. The same question now goes to President Garter. President Carter would you like to have the question repeated? THE PRESIDENT. Yes. MR. STONE. Yes President Carter the question of war and peace a central issue in this campaign. You've been criticized in the give-and-take for responding late to aggressive Soviet impulses for an insufficient buildup of our Armed Forces and a paralysis in dealing with Afghanistan and Iran. Governor Reagan on the other hand has been criticized for being all too quick to advocate the use of lots of muscle military action to deal with foreign crises such as I mentioned. Specifically what are the differences between the two of you on the uses of American military power? THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Stone I've had to make thousands of decisions since I've been President serving in the Oval Office. And with each one of those decisions that affect the future of my country I have learned in the process. I think I'm a much wiser and more experienced man than I was when I debated 4 years ago against President Ford. I've also learned that there are no simple answers to complicated questions. H. L. Mencken said that for every problem there's a simple answer. It would be neat and plausible — and wrong. The fact is that this Nation in the 8 years before I became President had its own military strength decreased. Seven out of eight years the budget commitments for defense went down 37 percent in all. Since I've been in office we've had a steady carefully planned methodical but very effective increase in our commitment for defense. But what we've done is to use that enormous power and prestige and military strength of the United States to preserve the peace. We've not only kept peace for our own country but we've been able to extend the benefits of peace to others. In the Middle East we've worked for a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt successfully and have tied ourselves together with Israel and Egypt in a common defense capability. This is a very good step forward for our Nation's security and we'll continue to do as we've done in the past. I might also add that there are decisions that are made in the Oval Office by every President which are profound in nature. There are always troublespots in the world and how those troubled areas are addressed by a President alone in that Oval Office affects our Nation directly the involvement of the United States and also our American interests. That is a basic decision that has to be made so frequently by every President who serves. That's what I've tried to do successfully by keeping our country at peace. MR. SMITH. Mr. Stone do you have a followup on — MR. STONE. Yes. I would like to be a little more specific on the use of military power and let's talk about one area for a moment. Under what circumstances would you use military forces to deal with for example a shutoff of Persian Oil Gulf if that should occur or to counter Russian expansion beyond Afghanistan into either Iran or Pakistan? I ask this question in view of charges that we are woefully unprepared to project sustained — and I emphasize the word "sustained" — power in that part of the world. THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Stone in my State of the Union address earlier this year I pointed out that any threat to the stability or security of the Persian Gulf would be a threat to the security of our own country. In the past we've not had an adequate military presence in that region. Now we have two major carrier task forces. We have access to facilities in five different areas of that region. And we've made it clear that working with our allies and others that we are prepared to address any foreseeable eventuality which might interrupt commerce with that crucial area of the world. But in doing this we have made sure that we address this question peacefully not injecting American military forces into combat but letting the strength of our Nation be felt in a beneficial way. This I believe has assured that our interests will be protected in the Persian Gulf region as we've done in the Middle East and throughout the world. MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan you have a minute to comment or rebut. GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well yes I question the figure about the decline in defense spending under the two previous administrations in the preceding 8 years to this administration. I would call to your attention that we were in a war that wound down during those 8 years which of course made a change in military spending because of turning from war to peace. I also would like to point out that Republican Presidents in those years faced with a Democratic majority in both Houses of the Congress found that their requests for defense budgets were very often cut. Now Gerald Ford left a 5-year projected plan for a military buildup to restore our defenses and President Garter's administration reduced that by 38 percent cut 60 ships out of the Navy building program that had been proposed and stopped the B-1 delayed the cruise missile stopped the production line for the Minuteman missiles delayed the Trident submarine and now is planning a mobile military force that can be delivered to various spots in the world — which does make me question his assaults on whether I am the one that is quick to look for use of force. MR. SMITH. President Carter you have the last word on this question. THE PRESIDENT. Well there are various elements of defense. One is to control nuclear weapons which I hope we'll get to later on because that's the most important single issue in this campaign. Another one is how to address troubled areas of the world. I think habitually Governor Reagan has advocated the injection of military forces into troubled areas when I and my predecessors both Democrats and Republicans — have advocated resolving those troubles and those difficult areas of the world peacefully diplomatically and through negotiation. In addition to that the buildup of military forces is good for our country because we've got to have military strength in order to preserve the peace. But I'll always remember that the best weapons are the ones that are never fired in combat and the best soldier is one who never has to lay his life down on the field of battle. Strength is imperative for peace but the two must go hand in hand. MR. SMITH. Thank you gentlemen. The next question is from Harry Ellis to President Carter. THE NATION'S ECONOMY MR. ELLIS. Mr. President when you were elected in 1976 the Consumer Price Index stood at 4.8 percent. It now stands at more than 12 percent. Perhaps more significantly the Nation's broader underlying inflation rate has gone up from 7 to 9 percent. Now a part of that was due to external factors beyond U.S. control notably the more than doubling of oil prices by OPEC last year. Because the United States remains vulnerable to such external shocks can inflation in fact be controlled? If so what measures would you pursue in a second term? THE PRESIDENT. Again it's important to put the situation into perspective. In 1974 we had a so-called oil shock wherein the price of OPEC oil was raised to an extraordinary degree. We had an even worse oil shock in 1979. In 1974 we had the worst recession the deepest and most penetrating recession since the Second World War. The recession that resulted this time was the briefest we've had since the Second World War. In addition we've brought down inflation. Earlier this year the first quarter we did have a very severe inflation pressure brought about by the OPEC price increase. It averaged about 18 percent the first quarter of this year. The second quarter we had dropped it down to about 13 percent. The most recent figures the last 3 months or the third quarter of this year the inflation rate is 7 percent — still too high but it illustrates very vividly that in addition to providing an enormous number of jobs — 9 million new jobs in the last 3 1/2 years — that the inflationary threat is still urgent on us. I noticed that Governor Reagan recently mentioned the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal which his own running mate George Bush described as voodoo economics and said that it would result in a 30-percent inflation rate. And Business Week which is not a Democratic publication said that this Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal — and I quote them I think-was completely irresponsible and would result in inflationary pressures which would destroy this Nation. So our proposals are very sound and very carefully considered to stimulate jobs to improve the industrial complex of this country to create tools for American workers and at the same time would be anti-inflationary in nature. So to add 9 million new jobs to control inflation and to plan for the future with the energy policy now intact as a foundation is our plan for the years ahead. MR. SMITH. Mr. Ellis do you have a followup question for Mr. Carter? MR. ELLIS. Yes Mr. President. You have mentioned the creation of 9 million new jobs. THE PRESIDENT. Yes. MR. ELLIS. At the same time the unemployment rate still hangs high as does the inflation rate. Now I wonder can you tell us what additional policies you would pursue in a second administration in order to try to bring down that inflation rate? And would it be an act of leadership to tell the American people they're going to have to sacrifice to adopt a leaner lifestyle for some time to come? THE PRESIDENT. Yes. We have demanded that the American people sacrifice and they've done very well. As a matter of fact we're importing today about one-third less oil from overseas than we did just a year ago. We've had a 25-percent reduction since the first year I was in office. At the same time as I said earlier we have added about 9 million net new jobs in that period of time — a record never before achieved. Also the new energy policy has been predicated on two factors: One conservation which requires sacrifice and the other one increase in production of American energy which is going along very well — more coal this year than ever before in history more oil and gas wells drilled this year than ever before in history. The new economic revitalization program that we have in mind which will be implemented next year would result in tax credits which would let business invest in new tools and new factories to create even more new jobs — about a million in the next 2 years. And we also have planned a youth employment program which would encompass 600000 jobs for young people. This has already passed the House; now has an excellent prospect to pass the Senate. MR. SMITH. Now the same question goes to Governor Reagan. Governor Reagan would you like to have the question repeated? GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes please. MR. ELLIS. Governor Reagan during the past 4 years the Consumer Price Index has risen from 4.8 percent to currently over 12 percent. And perhaps more significantly the Nation's broader underlying rate of inflation has gone up from 7 to 9 percent. Now a part of that has been due to external factors beyond U.S. control and notably the more than doubling of OPEC oil prices last year which leads me to ask you whether since the United States remains vulnerable to such external shocks can inflation in fact be controlled? If so specifically what measures would you pursue? GOVERNOR REAGAN. Mr. Ellis I think this idea that has been spawned here in our country that inflation somehow came upon us like a plague and therefore it's uncontrollable and no one can do anything about it is entirely spurious and it's dangerous to say this to the people. When Mr. Carter became President inflation was 4.8 percent as you said. It had been cut in two by President Gerald Ford. It is now running at 12.7 percent. President Carter also has spoken of the new jobs created. Well we always with the normal growth in our country and increase in population increase the number of jobs. But that can't hide the fact that there are 8 million men and women out of work in America today and 2 million of those lost their jobs in just the last few months. Mr. Carter had also promised that he would not use unemployment as a tool to fight against inflation. And yet his 1980 economic message stated that we would reduce productivity and gross national product and increase unemployment in order to get a handle on inflation because in January at the beginning of the year it was more than 18 percent. Since then he has blamed to the people for inflation OPEC he's blamed the Federal Reserve System he has blamed the lack of productivity of the American people he has then accused the people of living too well and that we must share in scarcity we must sacrifice and get used to doing with less. We don't have inflation because the people are living too well. We have inflation because the Government is living too well. And the last statement just a few days ago was a speech to the effect that we have inflation because Government revenues have not kept pace with Government spending. I see my time is running out here. I'll have to get this down very fast. Yes you can lick inflation by increasing productivity and by decreasing the cost of Government to the place that we have balanced budgets and are no longer grinding out printing press money flooding the market with it because the Government is spending more than it takes in. And my economic plan calls for that. The President's economic plan calls for increasing the taxes to the point that we finally take so much money away from the people that we can balance the budget in that way. But we'll have a very poor nation and a very unsound economy if we follow that path. MR. SMITH. A followup Mr. Ellis? MR. ELLIS. Yes you have centered on cutting Government spending in what you have just said about your own policies. You have also said that you would increase defense spending. Specifically where would you cut Government spending if you were to increase defense spending and also cut taxes so that presumably Federal revenues would shrink? GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well most people when they think about cutting Government spending they think in terms of eliminating necessary programs or wiping out something some service that Government is supposed to perform. I believe that there is enough extravagance and fat in Government. As a matter of fact one of the Secretaries of HEW under Mr. Carter testified that he thought there was $7 billion worth of fraud and waste in welfare and in the medical programs associated with it. We've had the General Accounting Office estimate that there is probably tens of billions of dollars that is lost in fraud alone and they have added that waste adds even more to that. We have a program for a gradual reduction of Government spending based on these theories and I have a task force now that has been working on where those cuts could be made. I'm confident that it can be done and that it will reduce inflation because I did it in California. And inflation went down below the national average in California when we returned money to the people and reduced government spending. MR. SMITH. President Carter. THE PRESIDENT. Governor Reagan's proposal the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal is one of the most highly inflationary ideas that ever has been presented to the American public. He would actually have to cut Government spending by at least $130 billion in order to balance the budget under this ridiculous proposal. I noticed that his task force that's working for his future plans had some of their ideas revealed in the Wall Street Journal this week. One of those ideas was to repeal the minimum wage and several times this year Governor Reagan has said that the major cause of unemployment is the minimum wage. This is a heartless kind of approach to the working families of our country which is typical of many Republican leaders in the past but I think has been accentuated under Governor Reagan. In California — I'm surprised Governor Reagan brought this up — he had the three largest tax increases in the history of that State under his administration. He more than doubled State spending while he was Governor — 122-percent increase — and had between a 20- and 30-percent increase in the number of employees — MR. SMITH. Sorry to interrupt — THE PRESIDENT. — in California. MR. SMITH. — Mr. Carter. THE PRESIDENT. Thank you sir. MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan has the last word on this question. GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. The figures that the President has just used about California is a distortion of the situation there because while I was Governor of California our spending in California increased less per capita than the spending in Georgia while Mr. Carter was Governor of Georgia in the same 4 years. The size of government increased only onesixth in California of what it increased in proportion to population in Georgia. And the idea that my tax-cut proposal is inflationary: I would like to ask the President why is it inflationary to let the people keep more of their money and spend it the way they'd like and it isn't inflationary to let him take that money and spend it the way he wants? MR. SMITH. I wish that question need not be rhetorical but it must be because we've run out of time on that. Now the third question to Governor Reagan from William Hilliard. URBAN POLICIES MR. HILLIARD. Yes Governor Reagan the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime strained race relations the fall in the quality of public education the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What specifically would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend? GOVERNOR REAGAN. I have been talking to a number of Congressmen who have much the same idea that I have and that is that in the inner-city areas that in cooperation with local government and with National Government and using tax incentives and with cooperation with the private sector that we have development zones. Let the local entity the city declare this particular area based on the standards of the percentage of people on welfare unemployed and so forth in that area. And then through tax incentives induce the creation of businesses providing jobs and so forth in those areas. The elements of government through these tax incentives for example a business that would not have for a period of time an increase in the property tax reflecting its development of the unused property that it was making wouldn't be any loss to the city because the city isn't getting any tax from that now. And there would simply be a delay and on the other hand many of the people that would then be given jobs are presently wards of the Government and it wouldn't hurt to give them a tax incentive because that wouldn't be costing Government anything either. I think there are things to do in this regard. I stood in the South Bronx on the exact spot that President Carter stood on in 1977. You have to see it to believe it. It looks like a bombed-out city — great gaunt skeletons of buildings windows smashed out painted on one of them "Unkept promises" on another "Despair." And this was the spot at which President Carter had promised that he was going to bring in a vast program to rebuild this area. There are whole blocks of land that are left bare just bulldozed down flat and nothing has been done. And they are now charging to take tourists through there to see this terrible desolation. I talked to a man just briefly there who asked me one simple question: "Do I have reason to hope that I can someday take care of my family again? Nothing has been done." MR. SMITH. Follow-up Mr. Hilliard? MR. HILLIARD. Yes Governor Reagan. Blacks and other nonwhites are increasing in numbers in our cities. Many of them feel that they are facing a hostility from whites that prevents them from joining the economic mainstream of our society. There is racial confrontation in the schools on jobs and in housing as nonwhites seek to reap the benefits of a free society. What do you think is the Nation's future as a multiracial society? GOVERNOR REAGAN. I believe in it. I am eternally optimistic and I happen to believe that we've made great progress from the days when I was young and when this country didn't even know it had a racial problem. I know those things can grow out of despair in an inner city when there's hopelessness at home lack of work and so forth. But I believe that all of us together — and I believe the Presidency is what Teddy Roosevelt said it was; it's a bully pulpit — and I think that something can be done from there because the goal for all of us should be that one day things will be done neither because of nor in spite of any of the differences between us — ethnic differences or racial differences whatever they may be — that we will have total equal opportunity for all people. And I would do everything I could in my power to bring that about. MR. SMITH. Mr. Hilliard would you repeat your question for President Carter? MR. HILLIARD. President Carter the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime strained race relations the fall in the quality of public education the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What specifically would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend? THE PRESIDENT. Thank you Mr. Hilliard. When I was campaigning in 1976 everywhere I went the mayors and local officials were in despair about the rapidly deteriorating central cities of our Nation. We initiated a very fine urban renewal program working with the mayors the Governors and other interested officials. This has been a very successful effort. That's one of the main reasons that we've had such an increase in the number of people employed. Of the 9 million people put to work in new jobs since I've been in office 1.3 million of those has been among black Americans and another million among those who speak Spanish. We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit mass transit. Under the windfall profits tax we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country. We also are pursuing housing programs. We've had a 73-percent increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education. These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that had been deteriorating so rapidly in the past. It's very important to us that this be done with the full involvement of minority citizens. I've brought into the top levels of Government — into the White House into administrative offices of the executive branch into the judicial system — highly qualified black and Spanish citizens and women who in the past had been excluded. I noticed that Governor Reagan said that when he was a younger man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country. Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem. We have gone a long way toward correcting these problems but we still have a long way to go. MR. SMITH. A followup question? MR. HILLIARD. Yes President Carter I'd like to repeat the same followup to you. Blacks and other nonwhites are increasing in numbers in our cities. Many of them feel that they are facing a hostility from whites that prevents them from joining the economic mainstream of our society. There is racial confrontation in the schools on jobs and in housing as nonwhites seek to reap the benefits of a free society. What is your assessment of the Nation's future in a multiracial society? THE PRESIDENT. Ours is a nation of refugees a nation of immigrants. Almost all of our citizens came here from other lands and now have hopes which are being realized for a better life preserving their ethnic commitments their family structures their religious beliefs preserving their relationships with their relatives in foreign countries but still forming themselves together in a very coherent society which gives our Nation its strength. In the past those minority groups have often been excluded from participation in the affairs of government. Since I've been President I've appointed for instance more than twice as many black Federal judges as all previous Presidents in the history of this country. I've done the same thing in the appointment of women and also Spanish-speaking Americans. To involve them in administration of government and a feeling that they belong to the societal structure that makes decisions in the judiciary and in executive branch is a very important commitment which I am trying to realize and will continue to do so in the future. MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan you have a minute for rebuttal. GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. The President talks of Government programs and they have their place. But as Governor when I was at that end of the line and receiving some of these grants for Government programs I saw that so many of them were dead-end. They were public employment for these people who really want to get out into the private job market where there are jobs with a future. Now the President spoke a moment ago about — that I was against the minimum wage. I wish he could have been with me when I sat with a group of teenagers who were black and who were telling me about their unemployment problems and that it was the minimum wage that had done away with the jobs that they once could get. And indeed every time it has increased you will find there is an increase in minority unemployment among young people. And therefore I have been in favor of a separate minimum for them. With regard to the great progress that has been made with this Government spending the rate of black unemployment in Detroit Michigan is 56 percent. MR. SMITH. President Garter you have the last word on this question. THE PRESIDENT. Well it's obvious that we still have a long way to go in fully incorporating the minority groups into the mainstream of American life. We have made good progress and there's no doubt in my mind that the commitment to unemployment compensation the minimum wage welfare national health insurance those kinds of commitments that have typified the Democratic Party since ancient history in this country's political life are a very important element of the future. In all those elements Governor Reagan has repeatedly spoken out against them which to me shows a very great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life. This to me is a very important difference between him and me in this election and I believe the American people will judge accordingly. There is no doubt in my mind that in the downtown central cities with the new commitment on an energy policy with a chance to revitalize homes and to make them more fuel-efficient with a chance for a synthetic fuels program solar power this will give us an additional opportunity for jobs which will pay rich dividends. MR. SMITH. Thank you gentlemen. Now for the fourth question to President Garter from Barbara Walters. INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM MS. WALTERS. Mr. President the eyes of the country tonight are on the hostages
