JIM LEHRER: Good evening. On behalf of the Commission on Presidential Debates I am pleased to welcome you to this first presidential debate of the 1988 campaign. I'm Jim Lehrer of the MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour. My colleagues on the panel are John Mashek of the Atlanta Journal-Constitution; Ann Groer of the Orlando Sentinel; and Peter Jennings of ABC News. For the next 90 minutes we will be questioning the candidates for President of the United States following a format designed and agreed to by representatives of the two candidates. The candidates are Vice President George Bush the Republican nominee; Governor Michael Dukakis the Democratic nominee. LEHRER: Our questions this evening will be about equally divided between foreign and domestic policy matters. The first question by agreement between the two candidates goes to Vice President Bush. It is a domestic question. You have two minutes for an answer sir. The polls say the number one domestic issue to a majority of voters is drugs. What is there about these times that drives or draws so many Americans to use drugs? BUSH: I think we've seen a deterioration of values. I think for a while as a nation we condoned those things we should have condemned. For a while as I recall it even seems to me that there was talk of legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana and other drugs and I think that's all wrong. So we've seen a deterioration in values and one of the things that I think we should do about it in terms of cause is to instill values into the young people in our schools. We got away we got into this feeling that value-free education was the thing. And I don't believe that at all I do believe there are fundamental rights and wrongs as far as use. And of course as far as the how we make it better yes we can do better on interdiction. But we've got to do a lot better on education and we have to do be tougher on those who commit crimes. We've got to get after the users more. We have to change this whole culture. You know I saw a movie Crocodile Dundee. And I saw the cocaine scene treated with humor as though this was a humorous little incident. And it's bad. Everybody ought to be in this thing. Entertainment industry people involved in the schools education. And it isn't a Republican or a Democrat or a liberal problem. But we have got to instill values in these young people. And I have put forward a many-point drug program that includes what I would do as President of the United States; in terms of doing better on interdiction; and in terms of better in the neighborhoods. But I think we're all in this together and my plea to the American people is values in the schools. LEHRER: Governor you have one minute to respond. DUKAKIS: I agree with Mr. Bush that values are important. But it's important that our leaders demonstrate those values from the top. That means those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership have to reflect those values ourselves. Here we are with a government that's been dealing with a drug-running Panamanian dictator. We've been dealing with him; he's been dealing drugs to our kids. Governors like me and others have been trying to deal with the consequences. I remember being in a high school in my own state as we were organizing something we call the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs and a young 16-year-old girl coming up to me desperate addicted dependent saying Governor I need help. We're providing that young woman with help. But I want to be a President of the United States who makes sure that we never again do business with a drug-running Panamanian dictator that we never again funnel aid to the contras through convicted drug dealers. Values begin at the top in the White House. Those are the values I want to bring to the presidency and to the White House beginning in January of 1989. LEHRER: Governor a follow-up question. You have two minutes to answer it. Are you suggesting sir that President Reagan is one of the causes of the drug problem in this country? DUKAKIS: I'm saying that those of us who are elected to positions of political leadership Jim have a special responsibility not only to come up with programs and I have outlined in detail the very important very strong program of enforcement as well as drug education prevention. And Mr. Bush is right – the two go hand in hand. But if our government itself is doing business with people who we know are engaged in drug profiteering and drug trafficking if we don't understand that that sends out a very very bad message to our young people it's a little difficult for me to understand just how we can reach out to that youngster that I talked about and to young people like her all over the country and say to them we want to help you. Now I've outlined in great detail a program for being tough on enforcement at home and abroad doubling the number of drug enforcement agents having a hemispheric summit soon after the 20th of January when we bring our democratic neighbors and allies together here in this hemisphere and go to work together. But we also have to take demand seriously. You know we have 5 percent of the world's population in this country. We're consuming 50 percent of the world's cocaine. And in my state I'm proud to say we've organized a drug education and prevention program which the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration says is a model for the country. We're helping youngsters; we're reaching out to them. And we're beginning with drug education and prevention beginning in the early elementary grades in every elementary school in our state and that's the kind of effort we need in every elementary school in the United States of America. And we've got to begin early in the first second and third grade before our youngsters begin to experiment with these very very dangerous substances. I guess the question I would ask of Mr. Bush is how we instill those values how we create this environment for the drug free schools that we want in this country. If he or representatives of the administration are either with or involving people like Noriega in our foreign policy or don't pursue that connection in a way that makes it possible for us to cut it off and to be an example to our kids all over the country. LEHRER: A minute to rebut Mr. Vice President. BUSH: Well the other day my opponent was given a briefing by the CIA. I asked for and received the same briefing. I am very careful in public life about dealing with classified information. And what I'm about to say is unclassified. Seven administrations were dealing with Mr. Noriega. It was the Reagan-Bush administration that brought this man to justice. And as the governor of Massachusetts knows there was no evidence that governor – that Mr. Noriega was involved in drugs no hard evidence until we indicted him. And so I think it's about time we get this Noriega matter in perspective. Panama is a friendly country. I went down there and talked to the president of Panama about cleaning up their money laundering and Mr. Noriega was there but there was no evidence at that time and when the evidence was there we indicted him. And we want to bring him to justice. And so call off all those pickets out there that are trying to tear down seven different administrations. LEHRER: All right the next question will be asked by John Mashek. It goes to Governor Dukakis and you'll have two minutes to answer. MASHEK: Governor Dukakis another troublesome issue for voters this year is the bulging federal deficit. In a Dukakis administration you say taxes will be raised only as a last resort. Would you identify for us then please three specific programs that you are willing to cut to bring that deficit down? DUKAKIS: Yes I've been very specific about those John. And let me lay out for you my own strategy for bring that deficit down because as a chief executive that's balanced ten budgets in a row I've had to make those tough decisions and those tough choices. First I've suggested that there are certain weapons systems which we don't need and we can't afford. Mr. Bush has been critical of me for that but I think those are the kinds of tough choices you have to make. I've also suggested that there are weapons systems that we should proceed on and I've outlined those in detail. Secondly we've got to invest in economic growth in this country in every part of this country. Building that kind of growth expands revenues and helps to bring down that deficit. Thirdly we have to bring interest rates down and we will as we come up with a good solid plan with the Congress for bringing that deficit down. And finally we've got to go out there and collect billions and billions of dollars in taxes owed that aren't being paid to this country. It's very unfair to the average taxpayer who pays his taxes and pays them on time to permit these monies to go uncollected. I've also suggested that on the domestic side there are areas where we can make some cuts. We ought to be able to come up with an agricultural policy in this country that gives our farm families a fair price and a decent future without spending $20 to $25 billion a year which is what we've been doing under this administration. We can help people to live better lives and at the same time save money by helping hundreds of thousands of families on welfare to get off or welfare and to become productive citizens again. The thing I don't understand about Mr. Bush's approach to this is how he could possibly be serious about bringing that deficit down given what he says he wants to do. He seems to want to spend a great deal of money on just about every weapon system; he says he's against new taxes although he's broken that pledge at least times in the last year that I know of; he wants to give the wealthiest taxpayers in this country a five-year $40 billion tax break. He also wants to spend a lot of money on additional programs. If he keeps this up he's going to be the Joe Isuzu of American politics. DUKAKIS: But I hope you won't take my five seconds away from me. I will say this – LEHRER: Your two minutes is up Governor. DUKAKIS: If he's serious about what he's saying then the only place he can go to balance that budget is to raid the Social Security Trust Fund and he tried that in 1985 and I think he's going to try it again. LEHRER: You have a minute to rebut. BUSH: Is this the time to unleash our one-liners? That answer was about as clear as Boston harbor. Let me help the Governor. There are so many things there I don't quite know where to begin. When you cut capital gains you put people to work. John Kennedy proposed cutting capital gains. Paul Tsongas a liberal senator from Massachusetts said the dumbest thing I did was to oppose the capital gains cut. It's not going to cost the government money. It's going to increase revenues to the federal government and it's going to create jobs. So that's one of the things that I think makes a big difference between us. Massachusetts doesn't have an enormous defense budget but nevertheless the governor raised taxes five different times. That happens to be a fact. And so let's kind of stay on the issue and I have made a specific proposal for what I call a flexible freeze. And it permits – economists on the East Coast and West think it's good – it permits the president to sort out the priorities and we continue to grow because I will not raise taxes. LEHRER: Your time is up too. A follow-up John. MASHEK: Mr. Vice President you have vowed not to raise taxes of any kind during your administration and at the same time you've proposed this capital gains cut you've proposed more incentive breaks for the oil industry. You've suggested new spending programs and even some Republicans say the flexible freeze you just spoke about will hardly make a dent in the deficit. Is the deficit no longer really a concern of yours the Republican Party or the taxpayers? BUSH: I think it's the Republican Party and my concern to bring it down. And presidential leadership that I want to provide in this area will bring it down but we've got to get the Democrats – Congress under control. They do all the spending they appropriate every dime and tell us how to spend every dime. I'd like to ask the Governor to join in getting for the President what 43 governors have the line-item veto. He has to operate in Massachusetts under a balanced budget proviso. I would like a balanced budget amendment. But the dynamics of the economy – we cut the taxes and revenues are up by 25 percent in three years. So the problem is – it's not that the working is being taxed too little or the person working out – the woman working in some factory being taxed too little. It is that we are continuing to spend too much. So my formula says grow at the rate of inflation. Permit the President to set the priorities on where we do the spending. And remember the federal deficit has come down $70 billion in one year in 1987. And if we – and the – actually this year Congress is doing a little better in controlling the growth of spending. Spending was only up something like 4 percent. So it isn't that we're taking too little – from taxpayer – we're spending too much still. And the formula I've given you works we've put it through a good economic model we've got good economists on the West Coast Michael Boskin and Marty Feldstein up there who's a very respected economist in the – Massachusetts. And they agree that if we can do what I've said we can get it down without going and socking the American taxpayer once again. Capital gains one more point on that please let's learn from history. A capital gains differential will increase jobs increase risk taking increase revenues to the federal government. LEHRER: Governor you have a minute to rebut. DUKAKIS: Well I hope all of those Americans out there who are watching us listening to us and trying to make up their mind about which one of us ought to be President of the United States listen to the Vice President very carefully. What he's proposing after over a trillion in new debt which has been added in the federal debt in the course of the past eight years an IOU our children and grandchildren will be paying for years is a tax cut for the wealthiest 1 percent of the people in this country an average of about $30000 that we're going to give to people making $200000 a year. Why that's more than the average teacher makes. We've had enough of that ladies and gentlemen. We've run up more debt in the last eight years than under all the Presidents from George Washington to Jimmy Carter combined. It's time for a chief executive who can make tough choices can work with the Congress can get that deficit down and begin to build a strong fiscal foundation under this country. LEHRER: All right the next question will be asked by Anne Groer and it will go the Vice President. You have two minutes to answer sir. GROER: Mr. Vice President you've said you want a kinder gentler presidency one that helps the less fortunate. Today 37 million Americans including many working families with aging parents and young children cannot afford any health insurance but earn too much to qualify for Medicaid. What will you do to provide protection for them and how will you pay for it? BUSH: One thing I will not do is sock every business in the country and thus throw some people out of work. I want to keep this economic recovery going. More Americans at work today than any time in history a greater percentage of the work force. What I will do is permit people to buy into Medicaid. I believe that's the answer. I am proud to have been part of an administration that past the first catastrophic health bill. And in that there are some Medicaid provisions that will be very helpful to the very kind of people we're talking about here. But we've got to keep going forward without killing off the engine and throwing people out of work. So the answer lies it seems to me in full enforcement of the catastrophic program. It lies to me in flexibility in Medicaid so people at the lowest end can buy in there and get their needs covered and then it also – I do not want to see us mandate across the board that every company has to do this because I really think that marginal operators are going to go say "We can't make it." And I think then you're going to see that people are put out of work. All these programs – and this cost on his – is – was – I saw an estimate I'd love to know what he thinks $35–$40 billion – and it seems to me that somebody pays that. There isn't any such thing as something free out there. It either gets passed along as increased prices or it gets passed along by people being put out of work so the business can continue to compete. So I think we ought to do it in the Medicaid system. I think we ought to do it by full enforcement of the catastrophic health insurance. I think we ought to do it by everybody doing what they can do out of conscience. It's a terrible problems in terms of flexibility on private insurance. But I just don't want to mandate it and risk putting this – setting the recovery back. LEHRER: A rebuttal Governor? DUKAKIS: But George that's no answer. BUSH: You don't like the answer but it's an answer. DUKAKIS: Well no it's no answer to those 37 million people most of them members of working families who don't have a dime of health insurance and don't know how to pay the bills if their kids get sick at night. I was in Houston on Tuesday meeting with a group of good citizens working citizens. All of them with little or no health insurance. One of them was a father who had been laid off a few months ago and lost his health insurance. Has an 11-year-old son and can't let that son compete in sports and Little League because he's afraid he's going to get hurt and he won't be able to provide health insurance to pay those bills. My state just became the only state in the nation to provide for universal health care and we did it with the support of the business community and labor and the health care community and with virtually everybody in the state. The fact of the matter is that employers who today are insuring their employees are paying the freight because they're paying for those who aren't. And I think it's time that when you got a job in this country it came with health insurance. That's the way we're going to provide basic health security for all of the citizens of this country of ours. LEHRER: Follow-up Anne? GROER: Yes. Since your Massachusetts health plan has been attacked by the Vice President and you have defended it in this way I would like to move on to perhaps one of the most costly medical catastrophes facing Americans today and that is AIDS. In – at the end of September the thousands of AIDS patients will lose their access to AZT which is the only Federally approved drug for treatment of the disease. Now I'd like to now sir if – what your position is on extending that and what it is you think the government ought to be doing about making AZT and other drugs available to people who are suffering from this disease. DUKAKIS: Well Anne let me just say before I answer your question that I didn't know that the Vice President attacked our program in Massachusetts. I hope he hasn't. Because has won the support of a great many people all over the state and I think it's a model for what I hope we can do across the country. But when I proposed my plan this past Tuesday he or one of his spokesmen called it socialized medicine. The last time the Vice President used that phrase I suspect he remembers it don't you? It was in 1964 and that's what he called Medicare. Well he was wrong then and he's wrong now. LEHRER: If I may interrupt at this point and caution the audience as I did before we went on the air please hold it down. You're only taking time away from your candidate when you do that. Governor continue please. DUKAKIS: Let me say this about AIDS. It's the single most important public health crisis single most important public health emergency we've had in our lifetimes and I think there are a number of things we have to do including supporting legislation which is now moving through the Congress which will commit this nation to the resources to find a cure which will provide broad education and prevention which will provide sensitive and caring treatment for the victims of AIDS. I think we have to demonstrate some flexibility and I think the FDA is attempting to do so now in trying to make it possible for new and experimental drugs to be available to people who are at risk at AIDS and I would hope that we could bring that kind of a policy to bear beginning in January. And I would encourage the current administration to proceed with that kind of flexibility where it's appropriate and where it's done carefully and responsibly. But we have not had the kind of leadership we should have had. In this particular area I think the Vice President and I are in general agreement on what we have to do. The special federal commission made good solid recommendations. I think we're both supportive of them and I would strongly lead in that area as I have in my state as Governor. LEHRER: Mr. Vice President a minute of rebuttal. BUSH: Well we're on the right track. The NIH is doing a good job in research. The Surgeon General is doing a good job in encouraging the proper kind of education. I notice that the Governor did not mention any testing. But we got to have a knowledge base. Testing should be confidential but we have to have a knowledge. We can't simply stick our heads in the sands in terms of testing. I'm chairman of the President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief and we are working with the FDA and they have sped up bringing drugs to market that can help. And you got to be careful here because there's a safety factor but I think these things – and then also I am one who believes we've got to go the extra mile in clean – being sure that that blood supply is pure. We cannot have a lack of confidence in the blood supply when it comes to operations and surgery and things of this nature. So research speeding the drugs to market testing blood supply are very important elements of this. LEHRER: Next question will be asked by Peter Jennings. It goes to the Governor. JENNINGS: Good evening Mr. Vice President Governor. Governor one theme that keeps coming up about the way you govern – you've both mentioned leadership tonight so I'd like to stay with that for a second. The theme that keeps coming up about the way you govern is passionless technocratic – DUKAKIS: Passionless? JENNINGS: Passionless technocratic the smartest clerk in the world. Your critics maintain that in the 1960s your public passion was not the war in Vietnam or civil rights but no fault auto insurance. And they say in the 1970s you played virtually no role in the painful busing crisis in Boston. Given the fact that a president must sometimes lead by sheer inspiration and passion. We need to know if this is a fair portrait of your governing or if it is a stereotype. And if it isn't fair give us an example of where you have had that passion and leadership that sometimes a president needs? DUKAKIS: Peter I care deeply about people all people working people working families people all over this country who in some cases are living from paycheck to paycheck in other cases are having a hard time opening up the door of college opportunity to their children in other cases don't have basic health insurance which for most of us we accept as a matter of course and assume we're going to have in order to pay the bills that we incur when we get sick. I'm somebody who believes deeply in genuine opportunity for every single citizen in this country and that's the kind of passion I brought to my state. I was a leader in the civil rights movement in my state and in my legislature. I cared very deeply about that war in Vietnam. I thought it was a mistake. I thought it was wrong. And I was one of the few legislators early in that war that took a stand against the war. I think it was the right stand at the time and I think history has proved us to be correct. But I have learned over time. I served one term. I was defeated as you know and defeat sometimes is an important lesson. I think I'm a much better Governor today. I think I'm a much better person a much better listener. I think I'll be a much better President for having gone through that experience. But the things that we have done in my state to bring opportunity to people on public assistance – over 50000 families on welfare that we've helped to move from welfare to work and to become productive citizens. The universal health care bill that we just talked about which will guarantee health care for all of our citizens the opening up of opportunity to minorities in my state affirmative action minority contracting the fact that we have a 3 percent unemployment rate and more jobs than people to fill them which gives us a tremendous opportunity to reach out to everybody and make them a part of this wonderful nation of ours with the opportunity that we create. These are things that I believe in very very deeply. I may be a little calmer than some about it. I may be a greater consensus-builder these days than I used to be and I think that's a good thing. But I'm running for the Presidency of the United States. I've been in public service for 25 years because I believe deeply in American goals and values and the people of this country and that's the kind of President I want to be. LEHRER: Mr. Vice President a rebuttal. BUSH: Well I don't question his passion. I question – and I don't question his concern about the war in Vietnam. He introduced or supported legislation back then that suggested that kids of Massachusetts should be exempt from going overseas in that war. Now that's a certain passion that in my view it's misguided passion. He – we have a big difference on issues. You see last year in the primary he expressed his passion. He said "I am a strong liberal Democrat" – August '87. Then he said "I am a card-carrying member of the ACLU." That was what he said. He is out there on out of the mainstream. He is very passionate. My argument with the governor is do we want this country to go that far left. And I wish we had time to let me explain. But I salute him for his passion. We just have a big difference on where this country should be led and in what direction it ought to go. LEHRER: Peter a question? Question for the vice president Peter. JENNINGS: I'd actually like to follow up if I may on this mention you've made of his card carrying membership in the American Civil Liberties Union. You've used the phrase "card carrying" so many times since Governor Dukakis first acknowledged that he was a card carrying member of the ACLU that some people have come to believe that you've used it to brand him in some way to identify him as people were identified in the 1950s as less than patriotic. I'd like to know why you keep repeating the phrase and what's the important issue here? What is so wrong with the governor being a member of an organization which has come to the defense of among other people Colonel Oliver North? BUSH: Nothing's wrong with it. But just take a look at the positions of the ACLU. But Peter please understand the liberals do not like me talking about liberal They don't like it when I say that he says he's a card carrying member. Now if that quote was wrong he can repudiate it right here. I've seen it authoritatively written twice and if I've done him an injustice and he didn't say it I'm very very sorry. But I don't agree with a lot of – most of the positions of the ACLU. I simply don't want to see the ratings on movies. I don't want my 10-year-old grandchild to go into an X-rated movie. I like those ratings systems. I don't think they're right to try to take the tax exemption away from the Catholic Church. I don't want to see the kiddie pornographic laws repealed; I don't want to see "under God" come out from our currency. Now these are all positions of the ACLU. And I don't agree with them. He has every right to exercise his passion as what he said a strong progressive liberal. I don't agree with that. I come from a different point. And I think I'm more in touch with the mainstream of America. They raised the same thing with me on the Pledge of Allegiance. You see I'd have found a way to sign that bill. Governor Thompson of Illinois did. I'm not questioning his patriotism. He goes out and says the man is questioning my patriotism. And then all the liberal columnists join in. I am not. I am questioning his judgment on these matters or where he's coming from He has every right to do it. But I believe that's not what the American people want and when he said when he said at the convention ideology doesn't matter just competence he was moving away from his own record from what his passion has been over the years. And that's all I'm trying to do is put it in focus. And I hope people don't think that I'm questioning his patriotism when I say he used his words to describe his participation in that organization. LEHRER: Governor a response. DUKAKIS: Well I hope this is the first and last time I have to say this. Of course the vice president is questioning my patriotism. I don't think there's any question about that and I resent it. I resent it. My parents came to this country as immigrants. They taught me that this was the greatest country in the world. I'm in public service because I love this country. I believe in it. And nobody's going to question my patriotism as the vice president has now repeatedly. The fact of the matter is if the Pledge of Allegiance was the acid test of one's patriotism – the vice president's been the presiding officer in the United States Senate for the past seven and a half years. To the best of my knowledge he's never once suggested that a session of the Senate begin with the Pledge of Allegiance. Mr. Bush I don't question your patriotism. When you're attacked for your military record I immediately said it was inappropriate it had no place in this campaign and I rejected it. I would hope that from this point on we get to the issues that affect the vast majority of Americans jobs schools health care housing the environment. Those are the concerns of the people that are watching us tonight. Not labels that we attach to each other questions about each other's patriotism and loyalty. LEHRER: The time is up Governor. Let's go now to John Mashek again. A question for the vice president. MASHEK: Mr. Vice President in a debate during the Republican primaries you said most of the nation's homeless are suffering from mental illness an assertion immediately challenged by one of your rivals. Estimates of the homeless range from a low of 250000 by the government to around three million including working families and their children. What commitment are you willing to make tonight to this voiceless segment of our society? BUSH: I want to see the McKinney Act fully funded. I believe that that would help in terms of shelter. I want to see – when I talked at our convention about a thousand points of light I was talking about the enormous numbers of shelters and organizations that help. The Governor's wife has been very active in the homeless. My campaign chairman Secretary Jim Baker's wife. This isn't government. These are people that care that are trying to give of themselves. The government has a role. It is to fully fund the McKinney Act. There are certain army bases that the act calls for that can be used in certain cases to shelter people when it's rough. And so I think that we're on the right track. I don't see this incidentally as a Democrat or a Republican or a liberal or conservative idea. I see an involvement by a thousand points of light. I see the funding that is required and I hope the Congress will fully fund this bill. They gave it a great deal of conscience and a great deal of work. And we're on the track on this one. But – and I look mental – that was a little overstated it. I'd say around 30 percent. And I think maybe we could look back over our shoulders and wonder whether it was right to let all those mental patients out. Maybe we need to do a better job in mental clinics to help them. Because there is a major problem there. A lot of them are mentally sick. And we've got to attend to them. But fully my short range answer is fully fund that McKinney Act. LEHRER: Governor a response. DUKAKIS: Well this is another fundamental difference that I have with the Vice President just as I do in the case of health care for 37 million members of working families in this country who don't have health insurance. The problem 
