JIM LEHRER: Good evening from the Bushnell Theater in Hartford Connecticut. I'm Jim Lehrer of The NewsHour on PBS. Welcome to the first of the 1996 Presidential debates between President Bill Clinton the Democratic nominee and Senator Bob Dole the Republican nominee. This event is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. It will last 90 minutes following a format and rules worked out by the two campaigns. There will be two-minute opening and closing statements; in between a series of questions each having three parts: a 90-second answer a 60-second rebuttal and a 30-second response. I will assist the candidates in adhering to those time limits with the help of a series of lights visible to both. Under their rules the candidates are not allowed to question each other directly. I will ask the questions. There are no limitations on the subjects. The order for everything tonight was determined by coin toss. Now to the opening statements and to President Clinton. Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Thank you Jim and thank you to the people of Hartford our hosts. I want to begin by saying again how much I respect Senator Dole and his record of public service and how hard I will try to make this campaign and this debate one of ideas not insults. Four years ago I ran for President at a time of high unemployment and rising frustration. I wanted to turn this country around with a program of opportunity for all responsibility from all and an American community where everybody has a role to play. I wanted a government that was smaller and less bureaucratic to help people have the tools to make the most of their own lives. Four years ago you took me on faith. Now there's a record: 10 million more jobs rising incomes falling crime rates and welfare rolls a strong America at peace. We are better off than we were four years ago. Let's keep it going. We cut the deficit by 60 percent. Now let's balance the budget and protect Medicare Medicaid education and the environment. We cut taxes for 15 million working Americans. Now let's pass the tax cuts for education and childrearing help with medical emergencies and buying a home. We passed family and medical leave. Now let's expand it so more people can succeed as parents and in the work force. We passed the 100000 police the assault weapons ban the Brady Bill. Now let's keep going by finishing the work of putting the police on the street and tackling juvenile gangs. We passed welfare reform. Now let's move a million people from welfare to work. And most important let's make education our highest priority so that every 8-year-old will be able to read every 12-year-old can log on to the Internet every 18-year-old can go to college. We can build that bridge to the 21st century and I look forward to discussing exactly how we're going to do it. LEHRER: Senator Dole two minutes. SENATOR BOB DOLE: Thank you. Thank you Mr. President for those kind words. And I thank the people of Hartford the Commission and all those out here who may be listening or watching. It's a great honor for me to be here standing here as the Republican nominee. I'm very proud to be the Republican nominee reaching out to Democrats and Independents. I have three very special people with me: my wife Elizabeth my daughter Robin who have never let me down; and a fellow named Frank Carafa from New York who along with Ollie Manninen helped me out in the mountains of Italy a few years back. I've learned from them that people do have tough times and sometimes you can't go it alone. And that's what America's all about. I remember getting my future back from doctors and nurses and a doctor in Chicago named Dr. Kelikian and ever since that time I've tried to give something back to my country to the people who are watching us tonight. America is the greatest place on the face of the Earth. And I know millions of you still have anxieties. You work harder and harder to make ends meet and put food on the table. You worry about the quality and the safety of your children and the quality of education. But even more importantly you worry about the future and will they have the same opportunities that you and I have had. And Jack Kemp and I want to share with you some ideas tonight. Jack Kemp is my runningmate doing an outstanding job. Now I'm a plain-speaking man and I learned long ago that your word was your bond. And I promise you tonight that I'll try to address your concerns and not try to exploit them. It's a tall order but I've been running against the odds for a long time. And again I'm honored to be here this evening. Federal Government's Role LEHRER: Mr. President first question: There's a major difference in your view of the role of the federal government and that of Senator Dole. How would you define the difference? PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well Jim I believe that the federal government should give people the tools and try to establish the conditions in which they can make the most of their own lives. That to me is the key. And that leads me to some different conclusions from Senator Dole. For example we have reduced the size of the federal government to its smallest size in 30 years. We've reduced more regulations eliminated more programs than my two Republican predecessors. But I have worked hard for things like the family and medical leave law the Brady bill the assault weapons ban the program to put 100000 police on the street. All of these are programs that Senator Dole opposed that I supported because I felt they were a legitimate effort to help people make the most of their own lives. I've worked hard to help families impart values to their own children. I supported the V-chip so that parents would be able to control what their kids watch on television when they're young along with the ratings system for television and educational television. I supported strong action against the tobacco companies to stop the marketing advertising and sale of tobacco to young people. I supported a big increase in the safe and drug-free schools program. These were areas on which Senator Dole and I differed but I believed that they were the right areas for America to be acting together as one country to help individuals and families make the most of their own lives and raise their kids with good values and a good future. LEHRER: Senator Dole one minute. SENATOR DOLE: I think the basic difference is – and I have had some experience in this – I think the basic difference – I trust the people; the President trusts the government. If you go back and look at the health care plan that he wanted to impose on the American people – one-seventh the total economy 17 new taxes price controls 35 to 50 new bureaucracies a cost of $1.5 trillion. Don't forget that; that happened in 1993. A tax increase that taxed everybody in America not just the rich. If you made $25000 – that's the original proposal – you got your Social Security taxes increased. We had a BTU tax that turned into a $35 billion gas tax a $265 billion tax increase. I guess I rely more on the individual. I carry a little card around in my pocket called the 10th Amendment. Where possible I want to give power back to the States and back to the people. That's my difference for the present and we'll have specific differences later. He noted a few but there are others. LEHRER: Mr. President 30 seconds. PRESIDENT CLINTON: I trust the people. We've done a lot to give the people more powers to make their own decisions over their own lives. But I do think we are right when we try to for example give mothers and newborns 48 hours before they can be kicked out of the hospital ending these drive-by deliveries. I think we were right to pass the Kassebaum-Kennedy bill which states you can't lose your health insurance just because you change jobs or because someone in your family has been sick. Our government is smaller and less bureaucratic and has given more authority to the states than its two predecessors under Republican Presidents. But I do believe we have to help our people get ready to succeed in the 21st century. State of the Nation LEHRER: Senator Dole the President said in his opening statement we are better off today than we were four years ago. Do you agree? SENATOR DOLE: Well he's better off than he was four years ago. [Laughter] PRESIDENT CLINTON: I agree with that. That's right. SENATOR DOLE: And I may be better off four years from now. But – [laughter] I don't know I look at the slowest growth in a century. He inherited a growth of 4.7 4.8 percent; now it's down to about 2.4 percent. We're going to pass a million bankruptcies this year for the first time in history. We've got stagnant wages; in fact women's wages have dropped 2.2 percent. Men's wages haven't gone up gone down. So we have stagnation. We have the highest foreign debt in history. And it seems to me that if you take a look – are you better off? Well I guess some may be better off. Saddam Hussein is probably better off than he was four years ago. Rene Preval is probably better off than he was four years ago. But are the American people? They're working harder and harder and paying more taxes. For the first time in history you pay about 40 percent of what you earn more than you spend for food clothing and shelter combined for taxes under this administration. So some may be better off. They talk about family income being up. That's not true in Connecticut; family income is down. And it's up in some cases because both parents are working; one works for the family and one works to pay taxes for the Government. We're going to give them a tax cut so they can spend more time with their children maybe even take a vacation. That's what America is all about. LEHRER: Mr. President one minute. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well let me say first of all in February Senator Dole acknowledged that the American economy was in the best shape it's been in in 30 years. We have 10 million more jobs a faster job growth rate than under any Republican administration since the 1920s. Wages are going up for the first time in a decade. We have record number of new small businesses. We had the biggest drop in the number of people in poverty in 27 years. All groups of people are growing – we had the biggest drop in income inequality in 27 years in 1995. The average family's income has gone up over $1600 just since our economic plan passed. So I think it's clear that we're better off than we were four years ago. Now we need to focus on what do we need to do to be better off still? How can we help people – as we are – to get their retirements when they work for small businesses to be able to afford health insurance to be able to educate their children? That's what I want to focus on. But we're clearly better off than we were four years ago as Senator Dole acknowledged this year. LEHRER: Senator Dole? SENATOR DOLE: I doubt that I acknowledged that this year but in any event I think we just look at the facts. We ask the people that are viewing tonight "Are you better off than you were four years ago?" It's not whether we're better off; it's whether they're better off. Are you working harder to put food on the table to feed your children? Are your children getting a better education? Drug use has doubled the past 44 months all across America. Crime has gone down but it's because of mayors like Rudy Giuliani where one-third of the drop happened in one city New York City. So yes some may be better off. But of the people listening tonight the working families who will benefit from our economic package they'll be better off when Bob Dole is President and Jack Kemp is Vice President. Medicare Reform LEHRER: Mr. President Senator Dole has come pretty close in the last few days to accusing you of lying about his position on Medicare reform. Have you done so? PRESIDENT CLINTON: Absolutely not. Let's look at the position. First of all remember that in this campaign season since Senator Dole has been a candidate he has bragged about the fact that he voted against Medicare in the beginning in 1965 one of only 12 members. He said he did the right thing then; he knew it wouldn't work at the time. That's what he said. Then his budget that he passed along with Speaker Gingrich cut Medicare $270 billion more than was necessary to repair the Medicare Trust Fund. It would have charged seniors more for out-of-pocket costs as well as more in premiums because doctors could have charged them more. The American Hospital Association the nurses association the Catholic Hospital Association all said hundreds of hospitals could close and people would be hurt badly under the Dole-Gingrich Medicare plan that I vetoed. And now with this risky $550 billion tax scheme of Senator Dole's even his own friends – his campaign cochair Senator D'Amato says that they can't possibly pay for it without cutting Medicare more and cutting Social Security as well according to him. Now my balanced budget plan adds 10 years to the life of the Medicare Trust Fund – 10 years. And we'll have time to deal with the long-term problems of the baby boomers. But it was simply wrong to finance their last scheme to cut Medicare $270 billion to run the risk of it withering on the vine. We always have to reform it over the years but we need someone who believes in it to reform it. LEHRER: Senator Dole. SENATOR DOLE: Well I must say I looked back at the vote on Medicare in 1965 – we had a program called Eldercare that also provided drugs and was means-tested so people who needed medical attention received it. I thought it was a good program. But I have supported Medicare ever since. In fact I used to go home and my mother would tell me – said "Bob all I've got is my Social Security and my Medicare. Don't cut it." I wouldn't violate anything my mother said. In fact we had a conversation about our mothers one day a very poignant conversation in the White House. I'm concerned about health care. I've had the best health care in government hospitals Army hospitals and I know its importance. But we've got to fix it. It's his trustees the President's trustees not mine who say it's going to go broke. He doesn't fix it for 10 years. We ought to appoint a commission just as we did with Social Security in 1983 when we rescued Social Security. And I was proud to be on that commission along with Claude Pepper the champion of senior citizens from Florida. And we can do it again if we take politics out of it. Stop scaring the seniors Mr. President. You've already spent $45 million scaring seniors and tearing me apart. I think it's time to have a truce. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well let me say first of all I'd be happy to have a commission deal with this and I appreciate what Senator Dole did on the '83 Social Security commission. But it won't be possible to do if his tax scheme passes because even his own campaign co-chair Senator D'Amato says he'll have to cut Medicare even more than was cut in the bill that I vetoed. I vetoed that bill because it cut more Medicare and basically ran the risk of breaking up the system. My balanced budget plan puts 10 years onto Medicare. We ought to do that; then we can have a commission. But Senator Dole's plans are not good for the country. Senator Dole's Tax Cut Proposal LEHRER: Senator Dole speaking of your tax plan do you still think that's a good idea the 15 percent across-the-board tax cut? SENATOR DOLE: Oh yes and you'll be eligible. [Laughter] PRESIDENT CLINTON: Me too? SENATOR DOLE: And so will the former President yes. [Laughter] PRESIDENT CLINTON: That's good. I need it. SENATOR DOLE: Well the people need it; that's the point. This is not a Wall Street tax cut. This is a family tax cut. This is a Main Street tax cut. Fifteen percent across – let's take a family making $30000 a year – that's $1261. Now maybe to some in this Bushnell Memorial that's not a lot of money but people watching tonight with a couple of kids a working family – that's four or five months of day care maybe a personal computer; it may be three or four months of mortgage payments. This economic package is about families but it's a six-point package. First of all it's a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution which President Clinton defeated. He twisted arms and got six Democrats to vote the other way. We lost by one vote. It's balancing the budget by the year 2002. It's the tax cut cutting capital gains 50 percent so that you can go out and create more jobs and more opportunities. It's a state tax relief. It's a $500-per-child tax credit. It's about litigation reform. Now that the President gets millions of dollars from the trial lawyers he probably doesn't like this provision. In fact when I fell off that podium in Chico before I hit the ground I had a call on my cell phone from a trial lawyer saying "I think we've got a case here." [Laughter] And it's also regulatory reform. So it's a good package Mr. President and we'd like to have your support. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well here's the problem with it. It sounds very good but there's a reason that 500 economists including seven Nobel Prize winners and business periodicals like Business Week and even Senator Dole's friend Senator Warren Rudman former Republican Senator from New Hampshire says it is not a practical program. It's a $550 billion tax scheme that will cause a big hole in the deficit which will raise interest rates and slow down the economy and cause people to pay more for home mortgages car payments credit card payments college loans and small business loans. It's not good to raise the deficit; we've worked too hard to lower it. It will actually raise taxes on 9 million people. And in addition to that it will force bigger cuts in Medicare Medicaid education and the environment than the ones that he and Mr. Gingrich passed that I vetoed last year. So it sounds great. But our targeted tax cut for education childrearing health care and homebuying which is paid for in my balanced budget plan – something that he has not done – certified by the Congressional Budget Office that's the right way to go. LEHRER: Senator Dole. SENATOR DOLE: The President wants to increase spending 20 percent over the next six years. I want to increase spending 14 percent. That's how simple it is. I want the government to pinch pennies for a change instead of the American families. We're talking about six percentage points over six years. And with that money you give it back to the working people. You also provide opportunity scholarships so low-income parents will have the same choice that others have in sending their children to better schools. And it will work. And when it does work Mr. President I know you will congratulate me. Campaign Financing LEHRER: Mr. President the Senator mentioned trial lawyers and that means campaign financing. How do you personally avoid being unduly influenced by people who give you money or give you services in your campaigns? PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well I try to articulate my positions as clearly as possible tell people what I stand for and let them decide whether they're going to support me or not. The Senator mentioned the trial lawyers. In the case of the product liability bill which they passed and I vetoed – I think that's what he's talking about – I actually wanted to sign that bill and I told the people exactly what--the Congress – exactly what kind of bill I would sign. Now a lot of the trial lawyers didn't want me to sign any bill at all but I thought we ought to do what we could to cut frivolous lawsuits. But they wouldn't make some of the changes that I thought should be made. And let me just give you an example. I had a person in the Oval Office who lost a child in a schoolbus accident where a drunk driver caused the accident directly but there were problems with the schoolbus. The drunk driver had no money. Under the new bill if I had signed it a person like that could never have had any recovery. I thought that was wrong. So I gave four or five specific examples to the Congress and I said "Prove to me that these people could recover but we're going to eliminate frivolous lawsuits; I'll sign the bill." But generally I believe that a President has to be willing to do what he thinks is right. I've done a lot of things that were controversial: my economic plan my trade position Bosnia Haiti taking on the NRA for the first time taking on the tobacco companies for the first time. Sometimes you just have to do that because you know it's right for the country over the long run. That's what I've tried to do and that's what I will continue to do as President. LEHRER: Senator Dole? SENATOR DOLE: You mean how does he avoid the conflict? Well I don't know in the case of the trial lawyers. When I look at the trial lawyers and when you're a few million short you run out to Hollywood and pick up $2 million to $4 million and organized labor comes to Washington DC and puts $35 million into the pot – now if these aren't special interests then I've got a lot to learn. I was there for a while before I left on June 11th. The trial lawyers – I don't – my wife is a lawyer. We're the only two lawyers in Washington that trust each other but we're lawyers. I like lawyers. I don't dislike trial lawyers. But it seems to me there has got to be some end to the frivolous lawsuits and there's got to be some cap on punitive damage. You're putting a lot of business people out of business small-business men and small-business women who paid 70 percent of your $265 billion tax increase the largest tax increase in the history of America. I said that one day and Pat Moynihan – and the Democrats say no – he said "in the history of the world." So I modified it--the largest tax increase in the history of the world. And it seems to me that there is a problem there Mr. President. And I will address you as Mr. President. You didn't do that with President Bush in 1992. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Let me say first of all I signed a tort reform bill that dealt with civilian aviation a couple of years ago. I've proved that I will sign reasonable tort reform. Secondly Senator Dole has had some pretty harsh comments about special interest money but it wasn't me who opposed what we tried to do to save the lives of children who are subject to tobacco and then went to the tobacco growers and bragged about standing up to the federal government when we tried to stop the advertising marketing and sales of tobacco to children. And it wasn't me that let the polluters actually come into the halls of Congress into the rooms and rewrite the environmental laws. That's what Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole did not me. SENATOR DOLE: That's not true. PRESIDENT CLINTON: So I believe that we should take a different approach to this and talk about how we stand on the issues instead of trying to characterize each other's motivations. I think Senator Dole and I just honestly disagree. LEHRER: Well Senator Dole let me ask you the same question I asked the President: How do you avoid being influenced by people who contribute money and services to your campaigns? SENATOR DOLE: I think it's very difficult. Let's be honest about it. That's why we need campaign finance reform. That's why I reach out to the Perot voters and we've done about all that--we are the reform party the Republican Party and the Perot voters who are looking for a home ought to take a look at the Republican record. Whatever it is whatever the checklist was in '92 it's all done but campaign finance reform. I worked with Senator Mitchell who played me I guess in the debate warmup. We tried six or eight years ago to – he appointed three people I appointed three people – to get campaign finance reform. We couldn't get it done because it wasn't enforceable. You suggested a commission; Newt Gingrich did. I've suggested that at least four or five years ago we have a commission on campaign finance reform they send it to Congress and we have to vote it up or down. That's how it works. We're never going to fix it by the parties because Democrats want a better advantage for themselves we want a better advantage as Republicans and that's not how it's going to work. But I want to touch on this tobacco thing. I know the President's been puffing a lot on that. But I want to go back to 1965. That was my first vote against tobacco companies when I said we ought to label cigarettes and I've had a consistent record ever since 1965. We passed a bill in 1992 to encourage the States to adopt programs to stop kids from smoking. All 50 states did it. It took three years. It wasn't until election year Mr. President that you ever thought about stopping smoking. What about drugs that have increased – doubled in the last 44 months? Cocaine is up 141 percent – or marijuana; cocaine up 166 percent. And it seems to me that you have a selective memory. Mine doesn't work that way so I just want to try to correct it as we go along. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Mr. Lehrer I hope we'll have a chance to discuss drugs later in the program but let me respond to what you said. I agree that too many incumbent politicians in Washington in both parties have consistently opposed campaign finance reform. That was certainly the case from the minute I got there. So after Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole took over the Congress I went to New Hampshire and a man suggested – a gentleman that unfortunately just passed away a couple of days ago suggested that we appoint a commission. And I shook hands with him on it and I appointed my members and the commission never met. And then Senator Dole's ardent supporter Senator McCain who is out there today along with Senator Feingold supported – sponsored a campaign finance reform proposal. I strongly supported it and members of Senator Dole's own party in the Senate killed it. And he was not out there urging them to vote for the McCain-Feingold bill. So I think the American people including the Perot supporters know that I've had a consistent record in favor of campaign finance reform and I will continue to have. And I hope we can finally get it in the next session of Congress because we need it badly. LEHRER: Senator Dole 30 seconds. SENATOR DOLE: Well on campaign reform itself we're going to get it when we have a bipartisan commission take it out of politics get people who don't have any interest in politics but understand the issue and let them make a recommendation to Congress. Now we're not kidding anybody Mr. President. These are sophisticated people watching tonight millions and millions of Americans. They know the Republican Party hasn't done it. They know the Democratic Party won't do it. We ought to agree that somebody else should do it and then we have to vote it up or down. PRESIDENT CLINTON: I agree. Teenage Drug Use LEHRER: Mr. President the Senator mentioned drugs. He's suggested in the past that you bear some responsibility for the rise in drug use of teenagers in the United States. Is he right? PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well Jim I think every American in any position of responsibility should be concerned about what's happened. I am. But let's look at the overall record. Overall in America cocaine use has dropped 30 percent in the last four years casual drug use down 13 percent. The tragedy is that our young people are still increasing their use of drugs up to about 11 percent total with marijuana. And I regret it. Let me tell you what I've tried to do about it. I appointed a four-star general who led our efforts south of the border to keep drugs from coming into the country as our nation's drug czar the most heavily decorated soldier in uniform when he retired. We submitted the biggest drug budget ever. We have dramatically increased control and enforcement at the border. We supported a crime bill that had 60 death penalties including the death penalty for drug kingpins. And I supported a big expansion in the safe and drug-free schools program to support things like the D.A.R.E. program because I thought all those things were very important. Do I think that I bear some responsibility for the fact that too many of our children still don't understand drugs are wrong drugs can kill you even though I have consistently opposed the legalization of drugs all my public life and worked hard against them? I think we all do. And I hope we can do better. I don't think this issue should be politicized because my record is clear and I don't think Senator Dole supports using drugs. I think we just have to continue to work on this until those who think it isn't dangerous and won't kill them and won't destroy their lives get the message and change. LEHRER: Senator. SENATOR DOLE: Again you're very selective Mr. President. You don't want to politicize drugs but it's all right to politicize Medicare and go out and scare senior citizens and other vulnerable groups veterans and people who get Pell grants and things like this. I mean you say we have done all these bad things which isn't the case. But it seems to me the record is clear. The record was pretty clear in Arkansas when you were Governor: drug use doubled. You resisted the appointment of a drug czar there because you thought it might interfere with treatment. But here you cut the drug czar's office 83 percent. You have cut interdiction substantially. That's what I want to stop it from coming across the border. And in my administration we're going to train the National Guard to stop it from coming across the border. This is an invasion of drugs from all over the world. And we have a responsibility. You had a Surgeon General McCaffrey you had a lady who said we ought to consider legalizing drugs. Is that the kind of leadership we need? And I won't comment on other things that have happened in your administration or your past about drugs. But it seems to me the kids ought to if they have started they ought to stop and just don't do it. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: Let me say again we did have a drug czar in Arkansas but he answered to the Governor just like this one answers to the President. That's what I thought we ought to do. Secondly Senator Dole you voted against the crime bill that had the death penalty for drug kingpins in it and you voted to cut services to 23 million school children under the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Act. I don't think that means you're soft on drugs. We just have a different approach. But let me remind you that my family has suffered from drug abuse. I know what it's like to see somebody you love nearly lose their lives and I hate drugs Senator. We need to do this together and we can. Gun Control LEHRER: Senator Dole on the Government – continuing to talk about the government's role – if elected President would you seek to repeal the Brady bill and the ban on assault weapons? SENATOR DOLE: Not if I didn't have a better idea but I've got a better idea. It's something I've worked on for 15 years. It's called the automated check or the instant check. It's being used in 17 states right now States like Florida Colorado Virginia and other states. You don't buy any gun – you don't get any gun. We've got 20 million names on a computer in Washington DC of people who should not have a gun. We ought to keep guns out of the hands of criminals and there are eight other categories that should not have guns. I've been working on this for a long long time. You walk in you put your little card in there. If it says "tilt" you don't get any gun. You don't get a handgun; you don't get a rifle; you don't get a shotgun. You get zippo. If we're going to protect American children and American families and people who live as prisoners in their own home we've got to stop guns from being dumped on the street. The administration says they support the instant check. They've appropriated about $200 million but only spent about $3 million to get it underway. In our administration in my administration we will expedite this. It keeps up the technology. It keeps guns out of the hands of people who should not have guns. That is the bottom line. And I believe it's a good idea. It has strong bipartisan support and perhaps that's another thing we can depoliticize. You talk about the Brady bill. There's only been one prosecution under the Brady bill – only one under the assault weapon ban and only seven under the Brady bill that you talk about all the time. And on the assault weapons ban out of 17 weapons that were banned only six are banned now because 11 have been modified and they're back on the street. Let's get together on this instant check because that will really make a difference. LEHRER: Mr. President. PRESIDENT CLINTON: The President. Let me
