Mr. Speaker Mr. Vice President members of Congress honored guests my fellow Americans: We are fortunate to be alive at this moment in history. Never before has our nation enjoyed at once so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats. Never before have we had such a blessed opportunity and therefore such a profound obligation to build the more perfect Union of our Founders’ dreams. We begin the new century with over 20 million new jobs; the fastest economic growth in more than 30 years; the lowest unemployment rates in 30 years; the lowest poverty rates in 20 years; the lowest African-American and Hispanic unemployment rates on record; the first back-to-back surpluses in 42 years; and next month America will achieve the longest period of economic growth in our entire history. We have built a new economy. And our economic revolution has been matched by a revival of the American spirit: crime down by 20 percent to its lowest level in 25 years; teen births down seven years in a row; adoptions up by 30 percent; welfare rolls cut in half to their lowest levels in 30 years. My fellow Americans the state of our Union is the strongest it has ever been. As always the real credit belongs to the American people. My gratitude also goes to those of you in this chamber who have worked with us to put progress over partisanship. Eight years ago it was not so clear to most Americans there would be much to celebrate in the year 2000. Then our nation was gripped by economic distress social decline political gridlock. The title of a best-selling book asked: "America: What Went Wrong?" In the best traditions of our nation Americans determined to set things right. We restored the vital center replacing outmoded ideologies with a new vision anchored in basic enduring values: opportunity for all responsibility from all a community of all Americans. We reinvented government transforming it into a catalyst for new ideas that stress both opportunity and responsibility and give our people the tools they need to solve their own problems. With the smallest federal work force in 40 years we turned record deficits into record surpluses and doubled our investment in education. We cut crime with 100000 community police and the Brady law which has kept guns out of the hands of half a million criminals. We ended welfare as we knew it requiring work while protecting health care and nutrition for children and investing more in child care transportation and housing to help their parents go to work. We’ve helped parents to succeed at home and at work with family leave which 20 million Americans have now used to care for a newborn child or a sick loved one. We’ve engaged 150000 young Americans in citizen service through AmeriCorps while helping them earn money for college. In 1992 we just had a roadmap. Today we have results. Even more important America again has the confidence to dream big dreams. But we must not let this confidence drift into complacency. For we all of us will be judged by the dreams and deeds we pass on to our children. And on that score we will be held to a high standard indeed because our chance to do good is so great. My fellow Americans we have crossed the bridge we built to the 21st century. Now we must shape a 21st century American revolution of opportunity responsibility and community. We must be now as we were in the beginning a new nation. At the dawn of the last century Theodore Roosevelt said "The one characteristic more essential than any other is foresight . . . it should be the growing nation with a future that takes the long look ahead." So tonight let us take our long look ahead and set great goals for our Nation. To 21st century America let us pledge these things: Every child will begin school ready to learn and graduate ready to succeed. Every family will be able to succeed at home and at work and no child will be raised in poverty. We will meet the challenge of the aging of America. We will assure quality affordable health care at last for all Americans. We will make America the safest big country on Earth. We will pay off our national debt for the first time since 1835.* We will bring prosperity to every American community. We will reverse the course of climate change and leave a safer cleaner planet. America will lead the world toward shared peace and prosperity and the far frontiers of science and technology. And we will become at last what our Founders pledged us to be so long ago: * White House correction. One nation under God indivisible with liberty and justice for all. These are great goals worthy of a great nation. We will not reach them all this year not even in this decade. But we will reach them. Let us remember that the first American Revolution was not won with a single shot; the continent was not settled in a single year. The lesson of our history and the lesson of the last seven years is that great goals are reached step by step always building on our progress always gaining ground. Of course you can’t gain ground if you’re standing still. And for too long this Congress has been standing still on some of our most pressing national priorities. So let’s begin tonight with them. Again I ask you to pass a real Patients’ Bill of Rights. I ask you to pass common-sense gun safety legislation. I ask you to pass campaign finance reform. I ask you to vote up or down on judicial nominations and other important appointees. And again I ask you—I implore you to raise the minimum wage. Now two years ago—let me try to balance the seesaw here—[laughter]—two years ago as we reached across party lines to reach our first balanced budget I asked that we meet our responsibility to the next generation by maintaining our fiscal discipline. Because we refused to stray from that path we are doing something that would have seemed unimaginable seven years ago. We are actually paying down the national debt. Now if we stay on this path we can pay down the debt entirely in just 13 years now and make America debt-free for the first time since Andrew Jackson was President in 1835. In 1993 we began to put our fiscal house in order with the Deficit Reduction Act which you’ll all remember won passages in both Houses by just a single vote. Your former colleague my first Secretary of the Treasury led that effort and sparked our long boom. He’s here with us tonight. Lloyd Bentsen you have served America well and we thank you. Beyond paying off the debt we must ensure that the benefits of debt reduction go to preserving two of the most important guarantees we make to every American Social Security and Medicare. Tonight I ask you to work with me to make a bipartisan downpayment on Social Security reform by crediting the interest savings from debt reduction to the Social Security Trust Fund so that it will be strong and sound for the next 50 years. But this is just the start of our journey. We must also take the right steps toward reaching our great goals. First and foremost we need a 21st century revolution in education guided by our faith that every single child can learn. Because education is more important than ever more than ever the key to our children’s future we must make sure all our children have that key. That means quality preschool and after-school the best trained teachers in the classroom and college opportunities for all our children. For seven years now we’ve worked hard to improve our schools with opportunity and responsibility investing more but demanding more in turn. Reading math college entrance scores are up. Some of the most impressive gains are in schools in very poor neighborhoods. But all successful schools have followed the same proven formula: higher standards more accountability and extra help so children who need it can get it to reach those standards. I have sent Congress a reform plan based on that formula. It holds states and school districts accountable for progress and rewards them for results. Each year our national government invests more than $15 billion in our schools. It is time to support what works and stop supporting what doesn’t. Now as we demand more from our schools we should also invest more in our schools. Let’s double our investment to help states and districts turn around their worst performing schools or shut them down. Let’s double our investments in after-school and summer school programs which boost achievement and keep people off the streets and out of trouble. If we do this we can give every single child in every failing school in America—everyone—the chance to meet high standards. Since 1993 we’ve nearly doubled our investment in Head Start and improved its quality. Tonight I ask you for another $1 billion for Head Start the largest increase in the history of the program. We know that children learn best in smaller classes with good teachers. For two years in a row Congress has supported my plan to hire 100000 new qualified teachers to lower class size in the early grades. I thank you for that and I ask you to make it three in a row. And to make sure all teachers know the subjects they teach tonight I propose a new teacher quality initiative to recruit more talented people into the classroom reward good teachers for staying there and give all teachers the training they need. We know charter schools provide real public school choice. When I became President there was just one independent public charter school in all America. Today thanks to you there are 1700. I ask you now to help us meet our goal of 3000 charter schools by next year. We know we must connect all our classrooms to the Internet and we’re getting there. In 1994 only 3 percent of our classrooms were connected. Today with the help of the Vice President’s E-rate program more than half of them are and 90 percent of our schools have at least one Internet connection. But we cannot finish the job when a third of all our schools are in serious disrepair. Many of them have walls and wires so old they’re too old for the Internet. So tonight I propose to help 5000 schools a year make immediate and urgent repairs and again to help build or modernize 6000 more to get students out of trailers and into high-tech classrooms. I ask all of you to help me double our bipartisan GEAR UP program which provides mentors for disadvantaged young people. If we double it we can provide mentors for 1.4 million of them. Let’s also offer these kids from disadvantaged backgrounds the same chance to take the same college test-prep courses wealthier students use to boost their test scores. To make the American dream achievable for all we must make college affordable for all. For seven years on a bipartisan basis we have taken action toward that goal: larger Pell Grants more affordable student loans education IRAs and our HOPE scholarships which have already benefited five million young people. Now 67 percent of high school graduates are going on to college. That’s up 10 percent since 1993. Yet millions of families still strain to pay college tuition. They need help. So I propose a landmark $30 billion college opportunity tax cut a middle class tax deduction for up to $10000 in college tuition costs. The previous actions of this Congress have already made two years of college affordable for all. It’s time make four years of college affordable for all. If we take all these steps we’ll move a long way toward making sure every child starts school ready to learn and graduates ready to succeed. We also need a 21st century revolution to reward work and strengthen families by giving every parent the tools to succeed at work and at the most important work of all raising children. That means making sure every family has health care and the support to care for aging parents the tools to bring their children up right and that no child grows up in poverty. From my first days as President we’ve worked to give families better access to better health care. In 1997 we passed the Children’s Health Insurance Program—CHIP—so that workers who don’t have coverage through their employers at least can get it for their children. So far we’ve enrolled two million children. We’re well on our way to our goal of five million. But there are still more than 40 million of our fellow Americans without health insurance more than there were in 1993. Tonight I propose that we follow Vice President Gore’s suggestion to make low income parents eligible for the insurance that covers their children. Together with our children’s initiative—think of this—together with our children’s initiative this action would enable us to cover nearly a quarter of all the uninsured people in America. Again I want to ask you to let people between the ages of 55 and 65 the fastest growing group of uninsured buy into Medicare. And this year I propose to give them a tax credit to make that choice an affordable one. I hope you will support that as well. When the baby boomers retire Medicare will be faced with caring for twice as many of our citizens; yet it is far from ready to do so. My generation must not ask our children’s generation to shoulder our burden. We simply must act now to strengthen and modernize Medicare. My budget includes a comprehensive plan to reform Medicare to make it more efficient and more competitive. And it dedicates nearly $400 billion of our budget surplus to keep Medicare solvent past 2025. And at long last it also provides funds to give every senior a voluntary choice of affordable coverage for prescription drugs. Lifesaving drugs are an indispensable part of modern medicine. No one creating a Medicare program today would even think of excluding coverage for prescription drugs. Yet more than three in five of our seniors now lack dependable drug coverage which can lengthen and enrich their lives. Millions of older Americans who need prescription drugs the most pay the highest prices for them. In good conscience we cannot let another year pass without extending to all our seniors this lifeline of affordable prescription drugs. Record numbers of Americans are providing for aging or ailing loved ones at home. It’s a loving but a difficult and often very expensive choice. Last year I proposed a $1000 tax credit for long-term care. Frankly it wasn’t enough. This year let’s triple it to $3000. But this year let’s pass it. We also have to make needed investments to expand access to mental health care. I want to take a moment to thank the person who led our first White House Conference on Mental Health last year and who for seven years has led all our efforts to break down the barriers to decent treatment of people with mental illness. Thank you Tipper Gore. Taken together these proposals would mark the largest investment in health care in the 35 years since Medicare was created—the largest investment in 35 years. That would be a big step toward assuring quality health care for all Americans young and old. And I ask you to embrace them and pass them. We must also make investments that reward work and support families. Nothing does that better than the earned-income tax credit the EITC. The "E" in the EITC is about earning working taking responsibility and being rewarded for it. In my very first address to you I asked Congress to greatly expand this credit and you did. As a result in 1998 alone the EITC helped more than 4.3 million Americans work their way out of poverty toward the middle class. That’s double the number in 1993. Tonight I propose another major expansion of the EITC: to reduce the marriage penalty to make sure it rewards marriage as it rewards work and also to expand the tax credit for families that have more than two children. It punishes people with more than two children today. Our proposal would allow families with three or more children to get up to $1100 more in tax relief. These are working families; their children should not be in poverty. We also can’t reward work and family unless men and women get equal pay for equal work. Today the female unemployment rate is the lowest it has been in 46 years. Yet women still only earn about 75 cents for every dollar men earn. We must do better by providing the resources to enforce present equal pay laws training more women for high-paying high-tech jobs and passing the "Paycheck Fairness Act." Many working parents spend up to a quarter—a quarter—of their income on child care. Last year we helped parents provide child care for about two million children. My child care initiative before you now along with funds already secured in welfare reform would make child care better safer and more affordable for another 400000 children. I ask you to pass that. They need it out there. For hard-pressed middle income families we should also expand the child care tax credit. And I believe strongly we should take the next big step and make that tax credit refundable for low income families. For people making under $30000 a year that could mean up to $2400 for child care costs. You know we all say we’re pro-work and pro-family. Passing this proposal would prove it. Ten of millions of Americans live from paycheck to paycheck. As hard as they work they still don’t have the opportunity to save. Too few can make use of IRAs and 401k plans. We should do more to help all working families save and accumulate wealth. That’s the idea behind the Individual Development Accounts the IDAs. I ask you to take that idea to a new level with new retirement savings accounts that enable every low and moderate income family in America to save for retirement a first home a medical emergency or a college education. I propose to match their contributions however small dollar for dollar every year they save. And I propose to give a major new tax credit to any small business that will provide a meaningful pension to its workers. Those people ought to have retirement as well as the rest of us. Nearly one in three American children grows up without a father. These children are five times more likely to live in poverty than children with both parents at home. Clearly demanding and supporting responsible fatherhood is critical to lifting all our children out of poverty. We’ve doubled child support collections since 1992. And I’m proposing to you tough new measures to hold still more fathers responsible. But we should recognize that a lot of fathers want to do right by their children but need help to do it. Carlos Rosas of St. Paul Minnesota wanted to do right by his son and he got the help to do it. Now he’s got a good job and he supports his little boy. My budget will help 40000 more fathers make the same choices Carlos Rosas did. I thank him for being here tonight. Stand up Carlos. [Applause] Thank you. If there is any single issue on which we should be able to reach across party lines it is in our common commitment to reward work and strengthen families. Just remember what we did last year. We came together to help people with disabilities keep their health insurance when they go to work. And I thank you for that. Thanks to overwhelming bipartisan support from this Congress we have improved foster care. We’ve helped those young people who leave it when they turn 18 and we have dramatically increased the number of foster care children going into adoptive homes. I thank all of you for all of that. Of course I am forever grateful to the person who has led our efforts from the beginning and who’s worked so tirelessly for children and families for 30 years now my wife Hillary and I thank her. If we take the steps just discussed we can go a long long way toward empowering parents to succeed at home and at work and ensuring that no child is raised in poverty. We can make these vital investments in health care education support for working families and still offer tax cuts to help pay for college for retirement to care for aging parents to reduce the marriage penalty. We can do these things without forsaking the path of fiscal discipline that got us to this point here tonight. Indeed we must make these investments and these tax cuts in the context of a balanced budget that strengthens and extends the life of Social Security and Medicare and pays down the national debt. Crime in America has dropped for the past seven years—that’s the longest decline on record— thanks to a national consensus we helped to forge on community police sensible gun safety laws and effective prevention. But nobody nobody here nobody in America believes we’re safe enough. So again I ask you to set a higher goal. Let’s make this country the safest big country in the world. Last fall Congress supported my plan to hire in addition to the 100000 community police we’ve already funded 50000 more concentrated in high-crime neighborhoods. I ask your continued support for that. Soon after the Columbine tragedy Congress considered commonsense gun legislation to require Brady background checks at the gun shows child safety locks for new handguns and a ban on the importation of large capacity ammunition clips. With courage and a tie-breaking vote by the Vice President—[laughter] —the Senate faced down the gun lobby stood up for the American people and passed this legislation. But the House failed to follow suit. Now we have all seen what happens when guns fall into the wrong hands. Daniel Mauser was only 15 years old when he was gunned down at Columbine. He was an amazing kid a straight-A student a good skier. Like all parents who lose their children his father Tom has borne unimaginable grief. Somehow he has found the strength to honor his son by transforming his grief into action. Earlier this month he took a leave of absence from his job to fight for tougher gun safety laws. I pray that his courage and wisdom will at long last move this Congress to make commonsense gun legislation the very next order of business. Tom Mauser stand up. We thank you for being here tonight. Tom. Thank you Tom. [Applause] We must strengthen our gun laws and enforce those already on the books better. Federal gun crime prosecutions are up 16 percent since I took office. But we must do more. I propose to hire more federal and local gun prosecutors and more ATF agents to crack down on illegal gun traffickers and bad-apple dealers. And we must give them the enforcement tools that they need tools to trace every gun and every bullet used in every gun crime in the United States. I ask you to help us do that. Every State in this country already requires hunters and automobile drivers to have a license. I think they ought to do the same thing for handgun purchases. Now specifically I propose a plan to ensure that all new handgun buyers must first have a photo license from their state showing they passed the Brady background check and a gun safety course before they get the gun. I hope you’ll help me pass that in this Congress. Listen to this—listen to this. The accidental gun rate—the accidental gun death rate of children under 15 in the United States is nine times higher than in the other 25 industrialized countries combined. Now technologies now exist that could lead to guns that can only be fired by the adults who own them. I ask Congress to fund research into smart gun technology to save these children’s lives. I ask responsible leaders in the gun industry to work with us on smart guns and other steps to keep guns out of the wrong hands to keep our children safe. You know every parent I know worries about the impact of violence in the media on their children. I want to begin by thanking the entertainment industry for accepting my challenge to put voluntary ratings on TV programs and video and Internet games. But frankly the ratings are too numerous diverse and confusing to be really useful to parents. So tonight I ask the industry to accept the First Lady’s challenge to develop a single voluntary rating system for all children’s entertainment that is easier for parents to understand and enforce. The steps I outline will take us well on our way to making America the safest big country in the world. Now to keep our historic economic expansion going the subject of a lot of discussion in this community and others I believe we need a 21st century revolution to open new markets start new businesses hire new workers right here in America in our inner cities poor rural areas and Native American reservations. Our nation’s prosperity hasn’t yet reached these places. Over the last six months I’ve traveled to a lot of them joined by many of you and many far-sighted business people to shine a spotlight on the enormous potential in communities from Appalachia to the Mississippi Delta from Watts to the Pine Ridge Reservation. Everywhere I go I meet talented people eager for opportunity and able to work. Tonight I ask you let’s put them to work. For business it’s the smart thing to do. For America it’s the right thing to do. And let me ask you something: If we don’t do this now when in the wide world will we ever get around to it? So I ask Congress to give businesses the same incentives to invest in America’s new markets they now have to invest in markets overseas. Tonight I propose a large new markets tax credit and other incentives to spur $22 billion in private-sector capital to create new businesses and new investments in our inner cities and rural areas. Because empowerment zones have been creating these opportunities for five years now I also ask you to increase incentives to invest in them and to create more of them. And let me say to all of you again what I have tried to say at every turn: This is not a Democratic or a Republican issue. Giving people a chance to live their dreams is an American issue. Mr. Speaker it was a powerful moment last November when you joined Reverend Jesse Jackson and me in your home state of Illinois and committed to working toward our common goal by combining the best ideas from both sides of the aisle. I want to thank you again and to tell you Mr. Speaker I look forward to working with you. This is a worthy joint endeavor. Thank you. I also ask you to make special efforts to address the areas of our Nation with the highest rates of poverty our Native American reservations and the Mississippi Delta. My budget includes a $110 million initiative to promote economic development in the Delta and a billion dollars to increase economic opportunity health care education and law enforcement for our Native American communities. We should begin this new century by honoring our historic responsibility to empower the first Americans. And I want to thank tonight the leaders and the members from both parties who’ve expressed to me an interest in working with us on these efforts. They are profoundly important. There’s another part of our American community in trouble tonight our family farmers. When I signed the farm bill in 1996 I said there was great danger it would work well in good times but not in bad. Well droughts floods and historically low prices have made these times very bad for the farmers. We must work together to strengthen the farm safety net invest in land conservation and create some new markets for them by expanding our programs for bio-based fuels and products. Please they need help. Let’s do it together. Opportunity for all requires something else today having access to a computer and knowing how to use it. That means we must close the digital divide between those who’ve got the tools and those who don’t. Connecting classrooms and libraries to the Internet is crucial but it’s just a start. My budget ensures that all new teachers are trained to teach 21st century skills and it creates technology centers in 1000 communities to serve adults. This spring I’ll invite high-tech leaders to join me on another new markets tour to close the digital divide and open opportunity for our people. I want to thank the high-tech companies that already are doing so much in this area. I hope the new tax incentives I have proposed will get all the rest of them to join us. This is a national crusade. We have got to do this and do it quickly. Now again I say to you these are steps but step by step we can go a long way toward our goal of bringing opportunity to every community. To realize the full possibilities of this economy we must reach beyond our own borders to shape the revolution that is tearing down barriers and building new networks among nations and individuals and economies and cultures: globalization. It’s the central reality of our time. Of course change this profound is both liberating and threatening to people. But there’s no turning back. And our open creative society stands to benefit more than any other if we understand and act on the realities of interdependence. We have to be at the center of every vital global network as a good neighbor and a good partner. We have to recognize that we cannot build our future without helping others to build theirs. The first thing we have got to do is to forge a new consensus on trade. Now those of us who believe passionately in the power of open trade we have to ensure that it lifts both our living standards and our values never tolerating abusive child labor or a race to the bottom in the environment and worker protection. But others must recognize that open markets and rule-based trade are the best engines we know of for raising living standards reducing global poverty and environmental destruction and assuring the free flow of ideas. I believe as strongly tonight as I did the first day I got here the only direction forward for America on trade—the only direction for America on trade is to keep going forward. I ask you to help me forge that consensus. We have to make developing economies our partners in prosperity. That’s why I would like to ask you again to finalize our groundbreaking African and Caribbean Basin trade initiatives. But globalization is about more than economics. Our purpose must be to bring together the world around freedom and democracy and peace and to oppose those who would tear it apart. Here are the fundamental challenges I believe America must meet to shape the 21st century world. First we must continue to encourage our former adversaries Russia and China to emerge as stable prosperous democratic nations. Both are being held back today from reaching their full potential: Russia by the legacy of communism an economy in turmoil a cruel and self-defeating war in Chechnya; China by the illusion that it can buy stability at the expense of freedom. But think how much has changed in the past decade: 5000 former Soviet nuclear weapons taken out of commission; Russian soldiers actually serving with ours in the Balkans; Russian people electing their leaders for the first time in 1000 years; and in China an economy more open to the world than ever before. Of course no one not a single person in this chamber tonight can know for sure what direction these great nations will take. But we do know for sure that we can choose what we do. And we should do everything in our power to increase the chance that they will choose wisely to be constructive members of our global community. That’s why we should support those Russians who are struggling for a democratic prosperous future; continue to reduce both our nuclear arsenals; and help Russia to safeguard weapons and materials that remain. And that’s why I believe Congress should support the agreement we negotiated to bring China into the WTO by passing permanent normal trade relations with China as soon as possible this year. I think you ought to do it for two reasons: First of all our markets are already open to China; this agreement will open China’s markets to us. And second it will plainly advance the cause of peace in Asia and promote the cause of change in China. No we don’t know where it’s going. All we can do is decide what we’re going to do. But when all is said and done we need to know we did everything we possibly could to maximize the chance that China will choose the right future. A second challenge we’ve got is to protect our own security from conflicts that pose the risk of wider war and threaten our common humanity. We can’t prevent every conflict or stop every outrage. But where our interests are at stake and we can make a difference we should be and we must be peacemakers. We should be proud of our role in bringing the Middle East closer to a lasting peace building peace in Northern Ireland working for peace in East Timor and Africa promoting reconciliation between Greece and Turkey and in Cyprus working to defuse these crises between India and Pakistan in defending human rights and religious freedom. And we should be proud of the men and women of our Armed Forces and those of ou
